Preoperative Antibiotic Prophylaxis for Endocarditis Patients who have
any form of valvular heart disease, as well as those with intracardiac
(ventricular septal or atrial septal defects) or intravascular shunts,
should be protected against endocarditis at the time of a known
bacteremic event. Endocarditis has occurred in a sufficiently
significant number of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(subvalvular aortic stenosis, asymmetric septal hypertrophy) and mitral
valve prolapse to warrant the inclusion of these two conditions in the
prophylaxis regimen. Bacteremia occurs after the following events:
dental extraction, 30% to 80%; brushing of teeth, 20% to 24%; use of
oral irrigation devices, 20% to 24%; barium enema, 11%; transurethral
resection of the prostate (TURP), 10% to 57%; upper GI endoscopy, 8%;
nasotracheal intubation, 16% (4 of 25 patients); and orotracheal
intubation, 0% (0 of 25 patients). The most recent guidelines from the
AHA consisted of an update in 2008 from the AHA/ ACC on endocarditis in
patients with valvular heart disease, with changes from the 2006
document shown in Table 32.6.172

TABLE 32.6 Changes Related to Endocarditis Prophylaxis: American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Guidelines on Valvular Heart
Disease 2006 VHD Guideline Recommendations

2008 VHD Focused Update Recommendations

Class I

Class IIa

Comments

Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis is recomProphylaxis against
infective endocarditis is reasonable for the Modified recommendamended
for the following patients: following patients at highest risk for
adverse outcomes from tion (changed class Patients with prosthetic heart
valves and patients with a infective endocarditis who undergo dental
procedures that of recommendation history of infective endocarditis
(level of evidence: C) involve manipulation of either gingival tissue or
the periapifrom I to IIa, changed Patients who have complex cyanotic
congenital heart cal region of teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa:
text); no class I recomdisease (e.g., single-ventricle states,
transposition Patients with prosthetic cardiac valves or prosthetic
material mendations exist for of the great arteries, tetralogy of
Fallot) (level of used for cardiac valve repair (level of evidence: B)
infective endocarditis evidence: C) Patients with previous infective
endocarditis (level of prophylaxis Patients with surgically constructed
systemic pulmoe­ vidence: B) nary shunts or conduits (level of evidence:
C) Patients with CHD (level of evidence: B) Patients with congenital
cardiac valve malformations, Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including
palliative shunts and particularly those with bicuspid aortic valves,
and conduits (level of evidence: B) patients with acquired valvular
dysfunction (e.g., Completely repaired congenital heart defect repaired
with rheumatic heart disease) (level of evidence: C) prosthetic material
or device, whether placed by surgery Patients who have undergone valve
repair (level of or by catheter intervention, during the first 6 months
after evidence: C) the procedure (level of evidence: B) Patients who
have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy when Repaired CHD with residual defects
at the site or adjacent to there is latent or resting obstruction (level
of evidence: C) the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device
(both of Patients with MVP and auscultatory evidence of valvular which
inhibit endothelialization) (level of evidence: B) regurgitation and/or
thickened leaflets on echocarCardiac transplant recipients with valve
regurgitation as a diography\* (level of evidence: C) result of a
structurally abnormal valve (level of evidence: C) CHD, Congenital heart
disease; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; VHD, valvular heart disease. \*This
footnote is obsolete. Please see 2006 VHD Guideline 3 for footnote text,
in Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Kanu C et al. ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
practice guidelines (writing committee to revise the 1998 guidelines for
the management of patients with valvular heart disease). Developed in
collaboration with the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists:
endorsed by the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions
and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2006;114:e84--e231.
From Nishimura RA, Carabello BA, Faxon DP, et al. ACC/AHA 2008 guideline
update on valvular heart disease: focused update on infective
endocarditis. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines: endorsed by the
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
Circulation. 2008;118:887--896.
Cardiac Valve Prostheses and Anticoagulant Therapy and Prophylaxis for
Deep Vein Thrombosis In patients with prosthetic valves, the risk of
increased bleeding during a procedure in a patient receiving
antithrombotic therapy must be weighed against the increased risk of
thromboembolism caused by stopping the therapy. Common practice in
patients undergoing noncardiac surgery with a mechanical prosthetic
valve in place is cessation of anticoagulant therapy 3 days
preoperatively. This time frame allows the international normalized
ratio to fall to less than 1.5 times normal. The oral anticoagulants can
then be resumed on postoperative day 1. Using a similar protocol,
Katholi and colleagues found no perioperative episodes of
thromboembolism or hemorrhage in 25 patients.173 An alternative approach
in patients at high risk for thromboembolism is conversion to heparin
during the perioperative period. The heparin can then be discontinued 4
to 6 hours preoperatively and resumed shortly thereafter. Current
prosthetic valves may have a lower incidence of this complication, and
the risk associated with heparin may outweigh its benefit in the
perioperative setting. According to the AHA/ACC guidelines, heparin can
usually be reserved for patients who have had a recent thrombus or
embolus within 1 year, those with demonstrated thrombotic problems when
previously off therapy, and those with more than three risk factors
(atrial fibrillation, previous thromboembolism, hypercoagulable
condition, and mechanical prosthesis).174 A lower threshold for
recommending heparin should be considered in patients with mechanical
valves in the mitral position, in whom a single risk factor would be
sufficient evidence of high risk. Subcutaneous low-molecular-weight
heparin offers an alternative outpatient approach.175 It is appropriate
for the surgeon and cardiologist to discuss the optimal perioperative
management for such a patient, including a review of the most recent
guidelines.176 A new guideline publication was published in 2014.176a
Regional anesthetic techniques may be avoided, although this issue is
controversial as many practitioners will use regional anesthesia in
patients who are receiving prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis.177-180
However, epidural hematoma has been associated with anticoagulant
therapy in many reports. Large retrospective reviews of outcome after
epidural or spinal anesthesia, or both, during or shortly before
initiation of anticoagulant therapy with heparin have not reported
neurologic dysfunction related to hematoma formation in any
patient.181,182 This paucity of damaging epidemiologic evidence,
although reassuring, does not reduce the need for frequent evaluation of
neurologic function and a search for back pain in the perioperative
period after regional anesthesia in any patient receiving any
anticoagulation or antiplatelet.177,183-185 The risk of regional
anesthesia concurrent with prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis with
heparin is greater with the use of low-molecular-weight heparin.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia has been treated successfully with
intravenous immunoglobulin.179 The American Society of Regional
Anesthesia and Pain Management has issued a consensus statement on the
use of regional anesthesia in anticoagulated patients.186 They suggest
that the decision to perform spinal or epidural anesthesia or analgesia,
and the timing of catheter removal in a patient receiving antithrombotic
therapy should be made on an individual basis, with the small but
definite risk of spinal hematoma weighed against the benefits of
regional anesthesia for a specific patient. It was, previously,
determined that venous thromboembolism is so common in postoperative
patients that almost 1% of postsurgical patients die of fatal pulmonary
embolism (Table 32.7).187 More recently, it has been estimated that
venous thromboembolism is responsible for up to 10% of all
hospital-related deaths.187a Because of this high mortality risk,
prophylaxis against deep vein thrombosis has attained widespread
acceptance; thus prophylaxis begins with 5000 units of heparin given
subcutaneously 2 hours preoperatively.187-189 Other trials have shown
equal effect with external pneumatic sequential compression
devices.188,190 The most current recommendations are available from the
American College of Chest Physicians for prophylaxis against venous
thromboembolism in 2012.190a Another problem that can arise is managing
a pregnant patient with a prosthetic valve during delivery. It is
recommended that warfarin be replaced by subcutaneous heparin during the
peripartum period. During labor and delivery, elective induction of
labor is advocated with discontinuance of all anticoagulant therapy, as
indicated for the particular valve prosthesis (discussed earlier).191
Auscultation of the prosthetic valve should be performed preoperatively
to verify normal functioning. Abnormalities in such sounds warrant
preoperative consultation and verification of functioning.
CARDIAC CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES: CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS Bradyarrhythmias,
especially if profound or associated with dizziness or syncope, are
generally managed with pacemakers. However, chronic bifascicular block
(right bundle branch block with a left anterior or posterior hemiblock
or left bundle branch block with combined left anterior and posterior
hemiblocks), even when only a first-degree heart block is present, can
progress to complete heart block and sudden perioperative death on rare
occasion. In six studies, less than 2% of the approximately 266 patients
with bifascicular block progressed to complete heart block
perioperatively.192 Conversely, these patients have a high 5-year
mortality rate (160 of 554 patients, or 29%). Most of the deaths were
related to tachyarrhythmias or ischemic events not usually preventable
by traditional pacemakers.193 Thus the presence of a bifascicular block
on the ECG should make the anesthesiologist worried about associated CAD
or left ventricular dysfunction; an echocardiogram should be evaluated
perioperatively. Nevertheless, these patients rarely have complete heart
block perioperatively. Therefore, prophylactic preoperative insertion of
temporary pacing wires for bifascicular block does not seem warranted;
however, central access can be established in advance in the event that
a temporary pacemaker needs to be inserted (most operating rooms do not
rely on transthoracic pacing, although it may be attempted if
available).194 The actual pacemaker equipment and appropriate personnel
TABLE 32.7 Incidence of Deep Vein Thrombosis and Fatal Pulmonary
Embolism INCIDENCE OF
Type of Surgery
Proximal Fatal Deep Vein Deep Vein Pulmonary Thrombosis Thrombosis
Embolism (%) (%) (%)
GENERAL Age \>40 years

10

\<1

0.1

Age \>60 years

10-40

3-15

0.8

Malignancy

50-60

Thoracic

30

VASCULAR Aortic repair

26

Peripheral

12

UROLOGIC Open prostatectomy

40

TURP

10

Other urologic

30-40

MAJOR GYNECOLOGIC With malignancy

40

Without malignancy

10-20

NEUROSURGERY Craniotomy

20-80

Laminectomy

4-25

ORTHOPEDIC Total hip replacement

40-80

Hip fracture

48-75

Tibial fracture

45

Total knee replacement

60-70

Head, neck, chest wall

11

MEDICAL Acute myocardial infarction

30

Stroke

60-75

Acute spine injury

60-100

Other bed bound

26

1.5-3.0 10-20

1.0-5.0 1.0-5.0

20

1.0-5.0

6

TURP, Transurethral resection of the prostate.

should be immediately available, and the equipment should be tested
regularly, because symptomatic heart block does occur perioperatively in
more than 1% of patients. One study appears to have confirmed this rate
of at least 1% for patients undergoing cardiac surgery.195 One percent
of patients in whom a pacing pulmonary artery catheter was not inserted
preoperatively subsequently required pacing before cardiopulmonary
bypass. By contrast, 19% of patients who had such a catheter in place
underwent cardiac pacing before cardiopulmonary bypass. Predictors of
the need for pacing included previous symptomatic bradyarrhythmia, a
history of transient complete AV block, and aortic valve disease. Older
studies demonstrated that a rate of more than five PVCs per minute on
preoperative examination correlates
with perioperative cardiac morbidity.144,151-153 To the classic criteria
for treating PVCs (the presence of R-on-T couplets, the occurrence of
more than three PVCs per minute, and multifocality of PVCs) must be
added frequent (\>10/h over a 24-hour period) and repetitive ventricular
beats. Electrophysiologic and programmed ventricular stimulation studies
are being used to indicate and guide treatment of patients with ischemic
heart disease or recurrent arrhythmias and survivors of out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest. Although such patients are often treated with
antiarrhythmic therapy, attention to their underlying condition should
be a focus of our preoperative management. Longterm antiarrhythmic
therapy is discussed in the last section of this chapter, on drug
therapy. Torsades de pointes is an arrhythmia characterized by episodes
of alternating electrical polarity such that the major vector of the QRS
complex seems to alternate around an isoelectric line. The hallmark
enabling differential diagnosis from ventricular tachycardia is the
unusual response of this arrhythmia to commonly used antiarrhythmic
drugs. In other words, the use of drugs that prolong the QT interval
(e.g., quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide, some of the
antihistamines, and the antipsychotic phenothiazines) may well make the
arrhythmia more frequent or of longer duration. Reports of the sudden
occurrence of torsades de pointes during surgical procedures have been
rare in the anesthesia literature. Immediate therapy consists of the
administration of magnesium or electrical cardioversion, followed by
overdrive cardiac pacing or the administration of β-adrenergic agonists
and discontinuation of drugs that prolong the QT interval. Premature
atrial contractions and cardiac rhythms other than sinus also correlate
with perioperative cardiac morbidity.144,152 These arrhythmias may be
more a marker of poor cardiovascular reserve than a specific cause of
perioperative cardiac complications. Preexcitation syndrome is the name
for supraventricular tachycardias associated with AV bypass tracts.196
Successful treatment, which is predicated on an understanding of the
clinical and electrophysiologic manifestations of the syndrome, consists
of either catheter ablation techniques or surgery using preoperative and
intraoperative techniques that avoid release of sympathetic and other
vasoactive substances and therefore tachyarrhythmias.193,197,198
Anesthesia for electrophysiologic procedures is discussed in Chapter 55.
Disorders of the Respiratory and Immune Systems GENERAL PREOPERATIVE AND
PREPROCEDURE CONSIDERATIONS Pulmonary complications after procedures
requiring anesthesia are as common as cardiovascular complications---
even more common if venous thromboembolism is included. It has,
relatively recently, been estimated that postoperative respiratory
complications can occur in up to 80% of surgical patients, noting
obesity, preexisting pulmonary disease, and advanced age are among the
chief risk factors.198a Thus pulmonary complications are equally as
important or more important to the patient and the health system in
terms of
morbidity, mortality, length-of-stay extension, and cost. Today there is
an even greater appreciation of the effects of smoking and sleep apnea
on perioperative and long-term care has increased.199-216 (Preoperative
and preprocedure identification and perioperative care of patients with
sleep apnea are discussed in the earlier section on obesity and in
Chapter 58.) The main purpose of preoperative testing is to identify
patients at risk for perioperative complications so that appropriate
perioperative therapy can be instituted to foster return to functional
status. Preoperative assessment can also establish baseline function and
the feasibility of surgical intervention. Whereas numerous investigators
have used pulmonary function tests to define inoperability or highrisk
versus low-risk groups for pulmonary complications, few have been able
to demonstrate that the performance of any specific preoperative or
intraoperative measure, except perhaps smoking cessation and physical
activity such as a walking program, reliably decreases perioperative
pulmonary morbidity or mortality and improves patient outcomes. Because
routine preoperative pulmonary testing and care are discussed
extensively in Chapter 41, the current discussion is limited to an
assessment of the effectiveness of this type of care. In fact, few
randomized prospective studies indicate an outcome benefit of
preoperative preparation. Stein and Cassara randomly allocated 48
patients to undergo preoperative therapy (cessation of smoking,
administration of antibiotics for purulent sputum, and use of
bronchodilating drugs, postural drainage, chest physiotherapy, and
ultrasonic nebulizer) or no preoperative therapy.212 The no-treatment
group had a mortality of 16% and morbidity of 60%, as opposed to 0% and
20%, respectively, for the treatment group. In addition, the treatment
group spent an average of 12 postoperative days in the hospital as
compared with 24 days for the 21 survivors in the no-treatment group.212
Collins and colleagues prospectively examined the benefits of
preoperative antibiotics, perioperative chest physiotherapy and therapy
with bronchodilating drugs, and routine postoperative analgesia
(morphine) on postoperative respiratory complications in patients with
COPD.217 Of these therapies, only preoperative treatment with
antibiotics had a beneficial effect. Hulzebos and colleagues performed a
single-center randomized trial of intensive inspiratory muscle
training.218 Preoperative inspiratory muscle training reduced the
incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications and the duration of
postoperative hospitalization in patients at high risk of developing a
pulmonary complication who were undergoing CABG surgery. Warner and
coworkers collected data retrospectively about smoking history and
prospectively (concurrently) about pulmonary complications for 200
patients undergoing CABG.219 These investigators documented that 8 weeks
or more of smoking cessation was associated with a 66% reduction in
postoperative pulmonary complications. Smokers who stopped for less than
8 weeks actually had an increase (from 33% for current smokers to 57.1%
for recent quitters) in the rate of one or more of the six complications
surveyed: purulent sputum with pyrexia; need for respiratory therapy
care; bronchospasm requiring therapy; pleural effusion or pneumothorax
(or both)
necessitating drainage; segmental pulmonary collapse, as confirmed by
radiography; or pneumonia necessitating antibiotic therapy. Other
investigators have found that both shorter and longer periods of
cessation of smoking were needed before achieving cardiovascular220 and
hematologic benefit.221 Bluman and associates performed a retrospective
chart review of 410 patients undergoing noncardiac surgery at a VA
hospital.222 Current smoking was associated with a nearly 6-fold
increase in the risk of a postoperative pulmonary complication.
Reduction in smoking within 1 month of surgery was not associated with a
decreased risk for postoperative pulmonary complications. Nakagawa and
coauthors also reported higher pulmonary complication rates in patients
undergoing pulmonary surgery who quit within 4 weeks of surgery than in
current smokers or those who had stopped smoking for more than 4
weeks.223 Wong and colleagues performed a systematic review of 25
studies of smoking cessation.224 At least 4 weeks of abstinence from
smoking reduced respiratory complications, and abstinence of at least 3
to 4 weeks reduced wound healing complications. Short-term (\<4 weeks)
smoking cessation did not appear to affect the risk of postoperative
respiratory complications. Two randomized trials focused on smoking
cessation. Wong and colleagues performed a prospective, multicenter,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, in which 286 patients were
randomized to receive varenicline or placebo.225 A perioperative smoking
cessation intervention with varenicline increased abstinence from
smoking 3, 6, and 12 months after elective noncardiac surgery with no
increase in serious adverse events. Lee and colleagues randomized
patients to a group receiving no specific smoking cessation intervention
or to an intervention group that received (1) brief counseling by the
preadmission nurse, (2) brochures on smoking cessation, (3) referral to
the Canadian Cancer Society's Smokers' Helpline, and (4) a free 6-week
supply of transdermal nicotine replacement therapy.226 All outcome
assessors and caregivers on the operative day were blinded to group
assignment. Smoking cessation occurred in 12 patients (14.3%) in the
intervention group as compared with 3 patients (3.6%) in the control
group (relative risk, 4.0; 95% CI, 1.2-13.7; P = .03). The overall rate
of combined intraoperative and immediate postoperative complications was
not significantly different between intervention and control groups. At
follow-up 30 days postoperatively, smoking cessation was reported in 22
patients (28.6%) in the intervention group compared with 8 patients