(11%) in controls (relative risk, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.2-5.5; P = .008). When
Skolnick and coworkers studied 602 children prospectively, exposure to
passive smoking (as measured by urinary cotinine, the major metabolite
of nicotine) correlated directly with airway complications. Children
with the least exposure to passive smoke had the fewest
complications.210 Secondhand smoke may be a model for particulate air
pollution, which can have immediate and long-term effects in increasing
lung dysfunction and inflammatory stimuli throughout the body.227,228
Celli and associates performed a randomized prospective controlled trial
of intermittent positive-pressure breathing (IPPB) versus incentive
spirometry and deep-breathing exercises in 81 patients undergoing
abdominal surgery.229 The groups exposed to a respiratory therapist
(regardless of the treatment given) had more than a 50% lower incidence
of clinical complications (30%-33% vs. 88%) and shorter hospital stays
than did the control group. Thus this demonstrates that the outcome
improves when any concern about lung function is shown by someone
knowledgeable in maneuvers designed to clear lung secretions. Bartlett
and coworkers randomly assigned 150 patients undergoing extensive
laparotomy to 1 of 2 groups.230 One group received preoperative
instruction in and postoperative use of incentive spirometry (10
times/h). The other group received similar medical care but no incentive
spirometry. Only 7 of 75 patients using incentive spirometry had
postoperative pulmonary complications, as opposed to 19 of 75 in the
control group. However, Lyager and colleagues randomly assigned 103
patients undergoing biliary or gastric surgery to receive either
incentive spirometry with preoperative and postoperative chest
physiotherapy or only preoperative and postoperative chest
physiotherapy.231 No difference in the postoperative course or pulmonary
complications was found between the groups. Other studies have shown a
specific benefit (i.e., greater than that provided by routine care) for
chest physiotherapy and IPPB. These studies are usually poorly
controlled, not randomized, or retrospective in design (or any
combination); these deficiencies probably substantially bias the results
toward finding a benefit in reducing postoperative pulmonary
complications. Although randomized prospective studies showed no benefit
or actual harm from chest physiotherapy and IPPB on the resolution of
pneumonia or postoperative pulmonary complications, the studies cited
earlier212,217,229,230 and numerous retrospective studies strongly
suggest that preoperative evaluation and treatment of patients with
pulmonary disease actually decrease perioperative respiratory
complications. Meta-analyses have suggested a benefit of anesthetic and
pain management with respect to respiratory outcomes. Rodgers and
associates reviewed 141 trials involving 9559 patients who had been
randomized to receive neuraxial blockade or general anesthesia. Overall
mortality was significantly less frequent in the neuraxial blockade
group (2.1% vs. 3.1%). The relative risk of pneumonia in the neuraxial
blockade group was 0.61 (CI, 0.48-0.81), and the relative risk of
respiratory depression was 0.41 (CI, 0.23-0.73).211 Further, Neuman and
colleagues examined a retrospective cohort of 18,158 patients undergoing
surgery for hip fracture in 126 hospitals in New York in 2007 and
2008.232 Patients receiving regional anesthesia experienced fewer
pulmonary complications (359 \[6.8%\] vs. 1040 \[8.1%\]; P \< .005).
Regional anesthesia was associated with a lower adjusted odds of
mortality (OR, 0.710; 95% CI, 0.541, 0.932; P = .014) and pulmonary
complications (OR, 0.752; 95% CI, 0.637, 0.887; P \< .0001) relative to
general anesthesia. In subgroup analyses, regional anesthesia was
associated with improved survival and fewer pulmonary complications
among patients with intertrochanteric fractures but not among patients
with femoral neck fractures. Not all studies demonstrate beneficial
effects of pharmacologic pretreatment. In afebrile outpatient American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class I and II children with no lung
disease or findings who underwent noncavitary, nonairway surgery lasting
less than 3 hours, neither albuterol nor ipratropium premedication
decreased adverse events.233 Evaluation of dyspnea is especially useful.
Boushy and coworkers found that grades of preoperative dyspnea
correlated with postoperative survival. (Grades of respiratory
TABLE 32.8 Grade of Dyspnea Caused by Respiratory Problems (Assessed in
Terms of Walking on a Level Surface at a Normal Pace)

TABLE 32.9 Classification of Risk of Pulmonary Complications for
Thoracic and Abdominal Procedures Category

Points

Category

Description

0

No dyspnea while walking on a level surface at a normal pace

A. Normal (% FVC + \[% FEV1/FVC\] \> 150)

0

I

"I am able to walk as far as I like, provided I take my time"

B. % FVC + (% FEV1/FVC) = 100-150

1

II

Specific (street) block limitation ("I have to stop for a while after
one or two blocks")

C. % FVC + (% FEV1/FVC) \<100

2

D. Preoperative FVC \< 20 mL/kg

3

III

Dyspnea on mild exertion ("I have to stop and rest while going from the
kitchen to the bathroom")

E. Post bronchodilator FEV1/FVC \<50%

3

IV

Dyspnea at rest

II. CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM A. Normal

0

Modified from Boushy SF, Billing DM, North LB, et al. Clinical course
related to preoperative pulmonary function in patients with bronchogenic
carcinoma. Chest. 1971;59:383--391.

dyspnea are provided in Table 32.8.)234 Mittman demonstrated an
increased risk of death after thoracic surgery, from 8% in patients
without dyspnea to 56% in patients with dyspnea.235 Similarly, Reichel
found that no patients died after pneumonectomy if they were able to
complete a preoperative treadmill test for 4 minutes at the rate of 2
mph on level ground.236 Other studies have found that the history and
physical examination of an asthmatic subject can also predict the need
for hospitalization.201 Wong and colleagues found that the risk index
correlated with postoperative pulmonary complications (Table 32.9).237
Arozullah and associates developed the first validated multifactorial
risk index for postoperative respiratory failure, defined as mechanical
ventilation for more than 48 hours after surgical procedures, or
reintubation and mechanical ventilation after postoperative
extubation.238 In a prospective cohort study of 181,000 male veterans as
part of the National Veterans Administration Surgical Quality
Improvement Program, seven factors independently predicted risk (Table
32.10). With increasing numbers of risk factors present, the rate of
complications increased from 0.5% (class 1) to 26.6% (class 4).
Arozullah and colleagues subsequently developed a risk index for
postoperative pneumonia by using data on 160,805 patients undergoing
major noncardiac surgery and validated the index by using data on an
additional 155,266 patients.239 Patients were divided into five risk
classes by using risk index scores (Table 32.11). Pneumonia rates were
0.2% in patients with 0 to 15 risk points, 1.2% in those with 16 to 25
risk points, 4.0% in those with 26 to 40 risk points, 9.4% in those with
41 to 55 risk points, and 15.3% in those with more than 55 risk points.
Gupta and colleagues used the American College of Surgeons NSQIP to
develop a risk model for postoperative respiratory failure.167 On
multivariate logistic regression analysis, five preoperative predictors
of postoperative respiratory failure were identified: type of surgery,
emergency case, dependent functional status, preoperative sepsis, and
higher ASA class (Table 32.12).

SPECIFIC DISEASES Pulmonary Vascular Diseases Pulmonary vascular
diseases include pulmonary hypertension secondary to heart disease
(postcapillary disorders),
I. EXPIRATORY SPIROGRAM

B. Controlled hypertension, myocardial infarction without sequelae for
\>2 years

0

C. Dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea,
dependent edema, congestive heart failure, angina

1

III. NERVOUS SYSTEM A. Normal

0

B. Confusion, obtundation, agitation, spasticity, ­discoordination,
bulbar malfunction

1

C. Significant muscular weakness

1

IV. ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES A. Acceptable

0

B. Paco2 \>50 mm Hg or PaO2 \<60 mm Hg on room air

1

C. Metabolic pH abnormality \>7.50 or \<7.30

1

V. POSTOPERATIVE AMBULATION A. Expected ambulation (minimum, sitting at
bedside) within 36 h

0

B. Expected complete bed confinement for ≥36 h

1

FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FVC, forced vital capacity;
Paco2, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PaO2, arterial
partial pressure of oxygen. Modified from Wong DH, Weber EC, Schell MJ,
et al. Factors associated with postoperative pulmonary complications in
patients with severe COPD. Anesth Analg. 1995;80:276--284.

parenchymal lung disease (pulmonary precapillary disorders), pulmonary
embolism, and cor pulmonale from COPD.240 Optimal preoperative
management of these conditions requires treatment of the underlying
disease and avoidance of worsening the process.240-242 Because pulmonary
embolism can be particularly difficult to diagnose as clinical findings
of pulmonary emboli are not always present or specific for the diagnosis
and include a history of tachypnea, dyspnea, palpitations, syncope,
chest pain, or hemoptysis. Physical examination can reveal a pleural
rub, wheezing, rales, a fixed and split second heart sound, right
ventricular lift, or evidence of venous thrombosis. If the ECG shows an
S1Q3 pattern, spiral CT or lung perfusion scans can be obtained to rule
out the diagnosis of pulmonary emboli. A high degree of suspicion is
necessary to warrant angiography and anticoagulation or fibrinolytic
therapy. If possible, the reactivity of the pulmonary vasculature should
be determined because it may be enhanced or decreased by such drugs as
nifedipine, hydralazine, nitroglycerin, prazosin, tolazoline,
phentolamine, sildenafil citrate, and nitric oxide.
TABLE 32.10 Preoperative Predictors of Postoperative Respiratory Failure
Variable

Odds Ratio (95% Confidence Interval)

TYPE OF SURGERY

TABLE 32.11 Postoperative Pneumonia Risk Index Preoperative Risk Factor

Point Value

TYPE OF SURGERY Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair

15 14

Abdominal aortic aneurysm

14.3 (12.0-16.9)

Thoracic

Thoracic

8.14 (7.17-9.25)

Upper abdominal

10

Neurosurgery, upper abdominal, or peripheral vascular

4.21 (3.80-4.67)

Neck

8

Neurosurgery

8

Neck

3.10 (2.40-4.01)

Vascular

3

Other surgery\*

1.00 (reference)

Emergency surgery

3.12 (2.83-3.43)

AGE 80 years

17

Albumin \< 30 g/L

2.53 (2.28-2.80)

70-79 years

13

Blood urea nitrogen \> 30 mg/dL

2.29 (2.04-2.56)

60-69 years

9

Partially or fully dependent status

1.92 (1.74-2.11)

50-59 years

4

History of COPD

1.81 (1.66-1.98)

FUNCTIONAL STATUS Totally dependent

10

AGE (YEARS) ≥70

1.91 (1.71-2.13)

Partially dependent

6

0-69

1.51 (1.36-1.69)

Weight loss \>10% in past 6 months

7

1.00 (reference)

History of COPD

5

General anesthesia

4

Impaired sensorium

4

History of cerebrovascular accident

4

BLOOD UREA NITROGEN LEVEL \<2.86 mmol/L (0.8 mg/dL)

4

7.85-10.7 mmol/L (22-30 mg/dL)

2

≥10.7 mmol/L (≥30 mg/dL)

3

Transfusion \>4 units

3

Emergency surgery

3

Steroid use for chronic condition

3

Current smoker within 1 year

3

Alcohol intake \>2 drinks/day in past 2 weeks

2

\<60

COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. \*Other surgery includes
ophthalmologic, ear, nose, mouth, lower abdominal, extremity,
dermatologic, spine, and back surgery. From Arozullah AM, Daley J,
Henderson WG, et al. Multifactorial risk index for predicting
postoperative respiratory failure in men after major noncardiac surgery:
the National Veterans Administration Surgical Quality Improvement
Program. Ann Surg. 2000;232:242--253.

Monitoring of pulmonary artery pressure is often required. Preoperative
measures should be undertaken to ensure that the patient is not exposed
to conditions that elevate pulmonary vascular resistance (e.g., hypoxia,
hypercapnia, acidosis, lung hyperinflation, hypothermia)243 or increased
systemic vascular resistance, as this can precipitate acute or worsened
right heart failure.

Infectious Diseases of the Lung Preoperative evaluation and treatment
should follow the basic guidelines outlined in the introduction to this
section and in Chapter 31. Treatment of the underlying disease should be
completed before all but emergency surgery is performed. Even though
elective surgery should be postponed whenever infectious diseases of the
lung are present, patients undergoing emergency surgery can have
nosocomial infections and immunocompromised systems. The predominant
pathogens for nosocomial pneumonia are gram-negative bacilli,
Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, anaerobes, and
pneumococci. Previously, the incidence of tuberculosis increased in the
late 1980s and in the 1990s, probably because of reactivation in
patients infected with HIV, through increased funding and directly
observed antituberculosis treatment the incidence has steadily declined.
Tuberculosis can lead to chronic pulmonary and systemic symptoms.
Affected patients may have malaise, headache, fever, hemoptysis, and
extrapulmonary diseases affecting the skin, cervical lymph nodes,
kidneys, pericardium, and meninges. Active disease is treated with
four-drug therapy:

COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. From Arozullah AM, Khuri
SF, Henderson WG, et al. Development and validation of a multifactorial
risk index for predicting postoperative pneumonia after major noncardiac
surgery. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:847--857.

isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol or streptomycin, and rifampin for 9
months. Therapy should probably be started preoperatively. Management of
these emergency patients (many of whom have adult respiratory distress
syndrome \[ARDS\]) before they are brought to the operating room may
include initiation of antiinfective therapy, optimization of fluid
status, facilitation of gas exchange, and therapy for the underlying
pathophysiologic process.

Chronic Diseases of the Lung Treatment of COPD may include the use of
short and long acting β-adrenergic drugs, parasympatholytic agents
(especially for exercise-induced asthma), systemic or inhaled
corticosteroids, and leukotriene antagonists. An estimated
TABLE 32.12 Preoperative Variables Significantly Associated With an
Increased Risk for Postoperative Respiratory Failure in 2007 Model from
the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
Project\* Parameter

Adjusted OR

95% Wald CI

Totally dependent functional status†

4.07

3.68-4.51

Partially dependent functional status†

2.16

1.98-2.34

ASA class 1‡

0.03

0.02-0.05

ASA class 2‡

0.14

0.11-0.17

ASA class 3‡

0.54

0.44-0.67

ASA class 4‡

1.28

1.04-1.57

Preoperative sepsis (none)§

0.46

0.42-0.50

Preoperative sepsis§

1.32

1.16-1.49

Preoperative septic shock§

2.47

2.16-2.82

Emergency case (absence versus presence)

0.56

0.52-0.61

Anorectal¶

0.26

0.15-0.44

Aortic¶

2.94

2.35-3.68

Bariatric¶

0.36

0.27-0.49

Brain¶

2.08

1.15-3.78

Breast¶

0.07

0.04-0.12

Cardiac¶

1.32

0.92-1.88

Ear, nose, and throat¶

1.11

0.26-4.71

Foregut/hepatopancreatobiliary¶

2.64

2.13-3.27

Gallbladder, appendix, adrenals, and spleen¶

0.57

0.45-0.71

Intestinal¶

1.78

1.44-2.18

Neck¶

0.59

0.33-1.07

Obstetrics and gynecology¶

0.29

0.09-0.94

Orthopedic¶

0.42

0.33-0.55

Other abdominal¶

1.27

1.001-1.62

Peripheral vascular¶

0.79

0.63-0.98

Skin¶

0.73

0.55-0.95

Spine¶

0.593

0.25-1.39

Thoracic¶

1.96

1.43-2.68

Venous¶

0.134

0.05-0.37

Urologic¶

1.36

0.82-2.28

ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; CI, confidence interval; OR,
odds ratio. \*The estimate and the standard error (SE) refer to the
estimate of the logistic regression coefficient for the specific
variable and its associated SE. C-statistic, 0.894. †Reference group,
independent functional status. ‡Reference group, ASA class 5. §Reference
group, preoperative systemic inflammatory response syndrome. ¶Reference
group, hernia surgery. From Gupta H, Gupta PK, Fang X, et
al. Development and validation of a risk calculator predicting
postoperative respiratory failure. Chest. 2011;140:1207--1215.
5% of this population has bronchospasm. Some investigators recommend
using inhaled bronchodilators as first-line drugs and reducing the dose
of inhaled steroids, such as beclomethasone dipropionate, budesonide,
mometasone, and fluticasone, which are inactivated after absorption.
However, in large doses, these "inhaled" steroids can suppress adrenal
function, and supplemental systemic corticosteroids may be needed at
times of stress (see the earlier discussion in the section on
adrenocortical malfunction). Preoperative assessment must include
gaining knowledge of
drug regimens and their effects and education of the patient regarding
proper use of an inhaler (Box 32.4), given that these drugs can interact
dangerously with anesthetics (see the last section of this chapter) or
can be used inappropriately and therefore produce side effects without
maximum benefit.199-209 No known interaction between the inhaled
anticholinergic ipratropium bromide and muscle relaxants has been
reported. An estimated 10% of asthmatic patients exhibit sensitivity to
aspirin and may react not only to compounds containing aspirin but also
to tartrazine, yellow dye
BOX 32.4 Procedures for Correct Use of a Metered-Dose Inhaler Remove the
cap and hold the inhaler upright. Shake the inhaler. Tilt the head back
slightly and exhale steadily to functional residual capacity. Position
the inhaler by using a spacer between the actuator and the mouth. Press
down on the inhaler while taking a slow, deep breath (3-5 s). Hold the
full inspiration for at least 5 and up to 10 s, if possible, to allow
the medication to reach deeply into the lungs. Repeat inhalations as
directed. Waiting 1 min after inhalation of the bronchodilator may
permit subsequent inhalations to penetrate more deeply into the lungs
and is necessary to ensure proper delivery of the dose. Rinse your mouth
and expectorate after using the inhaler.

number five, indomethacin, other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs,
and aminopyrine.244 Cystic fibrosis is characterized by dilatation and
hypertrophy of the bronchial glands, mucous plugging of the peripheral
airways, and frequently, bronchitis, bronchiectasis, and
bronchiolectasis. For all these conditions, the measures recommended
earlier in this section, as well as appropriate hydration to allow
mobilization of secretions, constitute optimal preprocedure therapy.
Surgical resection is the primary therapy for non--small cell carcinomas
(e.g., adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and large cell
carcinoma). These carcinomas account for 75% of all lung carcinomas, 12%
of all malignant tumors, and 20% of all cancer deaths in the United
States.245 Success of surgery can be predicted by the stage of the
tumor. The combination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy is the
current treatment of choice for small cell carcinomas of the lung.246
Oat cell (small cell) carcinoma of the lung and bronchial adenomas are
known for their secretion of endocrinologically active substances, such
as ACTH-like hormones. Squamous cell cancers in the superior pulmonary
sulcus produce Horner syndrome, as well as characteristic pain in areas
served by the eighth cervical nerves and first and second thoracic
nerves. These tumors are now treated with preoperative radiation;
surgical resection leads to an almost 30% "cure" rate. For all these
patients, their preoperative assessment should be viewed as a
"threelegged stool," including lung mechanics, parenchymal function, and
cardiopulmonary reserve.
Anaphylaxis, Anaphylactoid Responses, and Allergic Disorders Other than
Those Related to Lung Diseases and Asthma Anaphylactic and Anaphylactoid
Reactions. Anaphylaxis is a severe life-threatening allergic reaction.
Allergic applies to immunologically mediated reactions, as opposed to
those caused by pharmacologic idiosyncrasy, direct toxicity or drug
overdosage, or drug-drug interaction.247-249 Anaphylaxis is the typical
immediate hypersensitivity reaction (type I) produced by immunoglobulin
E (IgE) mediated release of pharmacologically active substances. These
mediators in turn produce specific end-organ responses in the skin
(urticaria), the respiratory system (bronchospasm and upper airway
edema), and the cardiovascular system (vasodilation, changes in
inotropy, and increased capillary permeability). Vasodilation occurs at
the level of the capillary and postcapillary venule and leads to
erythema, edema, and smooth muscle contraction. This clinical syndrome
is called anaphylaxis. By contrast, an anaphylactoid reaction denotes an
identical or very similar clinical response that is not mediated by IgE
or (usually) an antigen-antibody process.248,249 A large perioperative
database review found that hemodynamically significant anaphylaxis
occurred in 1 of every 8400 cases.249a Further, a personal history of
anaphylaxis was the best predictor of occurrence. In anaphylactic
reactions, an injected or inhaled (or ingested) substance---usually
drugs, food, or insect venom---can serve as the allergen itself.
Low-molecularweight agents are believed to act as haptens that form
immunologic conjugates with host proteins. The offending substance,
regardless of whether it is a hapten, may be the parent compound, a
nonenzymatically generated product, or a metabolic product formed in the
patient's body. When an allergen binds immunospecific IgE antibodies on
the surface of mast cells and basophils, histamine and eosinophilic
chemotactic factors of anaphylaxis are released from storage granules in
a calcium- and energy-dependent process.248,249 Other chemical mediators
are rapidly synthesized and are subsequently released in response to
cellular activation. These mediators include the following: slowreacting
substance of anaphylaxis, which is a combination of three leukotrienes;
other leukotrienes;248,249 kinins; platelet-activating factors;
adenosine; chemotactic factors; heparin; tryptase; chymase; and
prostaglandins, including the potent bronchoconstrictor prostaglandin
D2; eosinophil growth and activating factors; mast cell growth factors;
and proinflammatory and other factors that contribute to the IgE isotype
switch. The end-organ effects of the mediators produce the clinical
syndrome of anaphylaxis. Usually, a first wave of symptoms, including
those caused by vasodilation and a feeling of impending doom, is quickly
followed by a second wave as the cascade of mediators amplifies the
reactions. In a sensitized patient, onset of the signs and symptoms
caused by these mediators is usually immediate but may be delayed 2 to
15 minutes or, in rare instances, as long as 2.5 hours after the
parenteral injection of antigen.250,251 After oral administration,
manifestations may occur at unpredictable times. Mast cell
proliferation, together with severe progressive inflammation,
contributes to the worsening of symptoms that occurs even after an
allergen load is no longer present. The antigen present in cells and
lymphocytes, as well as activated mast cells, starts to induce the
production of cytokines. These proinflammatory cytokines recruit more
inflammatory cells, a process that leads to tissue edema and mediates a
second wave of mast cell degranulation. This second wave can promote the
recurrence of severe symptoms 6 to 8 hours later and necessitates, some
believe, at least 8 hours of continued ICU-like observation. In
addition, biologically active mediators can be generated by multiple
effector processes to produce an anaphylactoid reaction. Activation of
the blood coagulation and fibrinolytic systems, the kinin-generating
sequence, or the
complement cascade can produce the same inflammatory substances that
result in an anaphylactic reaction. The two mechanisms known to activate
the complement system are called classical and alternative. The
classical pathway can be initiated through IgG or IgM (transfusion
reactions) or plasmin. The alternative pathway can be activated by
lipopolysaccharides (endotoxin), drugs (Althesin), radiographic contrast
media,252 membranes (nylon tricot membranes for bubble oxygenators),
cellophane membranes of dialyzers, vascular graft material,253 latex or
latex-containing products,254,255 and perfluorocarbon artificial blood.
Muscle relaxants were previously believed to be the most common drug
associated with anaphylaxis, though recent evidence supports protamine
and antibiotics with increased risk.249a However, this may change with
the recent approval of sugammadex as one of the primary concerns
regarding the delaying its approval in the United States was
"hypersensitivity reactions," which includes anaphylaxis. Latex
continues to account for a significant number of these reactions, and
the incidence of intraoperative anaphylaxis caused by latex is
increasing. In addition, histamine can be liberated independent of
immunologic reactions.256 Mast cells and basophils release histamine in
response to chemicals or drugs. Most narcotics can release histamine,256
and they can produce an anaphylactoid reaction, as can radiographic
contrast media.252 What makes some patients more susceptible to the
release of histamine in response to drugs is unknown, but hereditary and
environmental factors may play a role. Intravenous contrast material is
probably the most frequently used agent that causes anaphylactoid
reactions. Because diagnostic (skin and other) tests are helpful only in
IgE-mediated reactions, pretesting is not useful for contrast reactions.
Pretreatment with diphenhydramine, cimetidine (or ranitidine), and
corticosteroids has been reported to be useful in preventing or
ameliorating anaphylactoid reactions to intravenous contrast
material.252,257 Unfortunately, very large doses of steroids (1 g of
methylprednisolone intravenously) may be necessary to obtain a
beneficial effect, though the efficacy of large-dose steroid therapy has
not been confirmed.258 Other common substances associated with
anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions that may merit preoperative
therapy include antibiotics, intravascular volume expanders, and blood
products.258 The anesthesiologist should always be prepared
perioperatively to treat an anaphylactic or anaphylactoid response.
Minimizing Risks Preoperatively. Although virtually all evidence on this
subject is merely anecdotal, enough consistent thought recurs through
the literature to justify proposing an optimal approach to these
problems. First, predisposing factors should be sought; patients with a
history of atopy or allergic rhinitis should be suspected of being at
risk. Other risk factors of note include multiple previous procedures,
history of spina bifida, history of asthma, food allergies associated
with latex allergy (including avocado, kiwi, banana, pineapple, papaya,
chestnut, and buckwheat), systemic mastocytosis, and hereditary
angioedema.258a Because anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reactions to
contrast media occur 5 to 10 times more frequently in patients with a
previously suspected reaction, consideration should be given to the
administration of low-osmotic agents and both H1- and H2-receptor
antagonists for 16 to 24 hours before exposing these patients to a
suspected allergen. H1-receptor antagonists appear to require this much
time to act on the receptor. Volume status can be optimized,248 and
perhaps large doses of steroids (1 g of hydrocortisone) should also be
administered before exposing patients to agents associated with a high
incidence of anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions.258 Older patients
and patients taking β-adrenergic blocking drugs present special
problems; they are at higher risk of having complications from both
pretreatment (especially vigorous hydration) and therapy for
anaphylactic reactions (glucagon is useful here to overcome epinephrine
resistance) and are less responsive to treatment regimens.259 One
approach is to avoid drugs likely to trigger anaphylactic or
anaphylactoid reactions or alter the treatment protocol for this group.
Drawing blood for later analysis, especially of tryptase, can be useful
in clarifying the diagnosis.260 With the increasing incidence of latex
hypersensitivity, attempts have been made to make much of the operating
room environment latex free; however, costs and preferences have
resulted in the continued use of latex-containing gloves in many
hospitals. Nonetheless, more hospitals are totally latex free. In
allergic patients, care should be taken to ensure that no
latex-containing products are present in the operating room.

Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases Primary immunodeficiency diseases
usually manifest early in life as recurrent infections. Along with
survival achieved with antibiotic and antibody treatment have come new
prominent features: cancer and allergic and autoimmune disorders.
Hereditary angioedema is an autosomal dominant genetic disease
characterized by episodes of angioedema involving the subcutaneous
tissues and submucosa of the GI tract and airway and often manifested as
abdominal pain. These patients have a functionally impotent inhibitor or
deficiency of an inhibitor to complement component C1 leading to an
overproduction of bradykinin resulting in vascular permeability. The
most feared complication for the anesthesiologist is airway edema
resulting in an unexpected difficult airway.260a The mainstay of
treatment of an acute attack is supportive because epinephrine,
antihistamines, and corticosteroids often fail to work. The severity of
attacks can be prevented or decreased by drugs that are either
antifibrinolytics (e.g., ε-aminocaproic acid \[EACA\] and tranexamic
acid) or attenuated androgens (e.g., danazol and stanozolol). Because
trauma can precipitate acute attacks, prophylactic therapy with plasma
derived C1-INH, attenuated androgens, antifibrinolytics, or all three is
recommended before elective surgery; a repeat dose of C1-INH can be
given if edema develops.260a Fresh frozen plasma has been used during
acute attacks with success because it contains C1-INH, though FFP could
theoretically worsen an attack, as it contains other complement
components and should only be used if no other treatment is
available.260a Most of the 1 in 700 persons who have selective IgA
deficiency (i.e., \<5 mg/dL) have repeated serious infections or
connective tissue disorders. These infections commonly involve the
respiratory tract (e.g., sinusitis, otitis) or GI tract (manifested as
diarrhea, malabsorption, or both). If the patient has rheumatoid
arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, or systemic lupus erythematosus, the
anesthetist should consider the possibility of an isolated IgA
deficiency;
however, patients with this disorder can be otherwise healthy. Because
antibodies to IgA may develop in these patients if they were previously
exposed to IgA (as could occur from a previous blood transfusion),
subsequent blood transfusions can cause anaphylaxis, even when they
contain washed erythrocytes. Transfusions should therefore consist of
blood donated by another IgA-deficient patient. Many immunomodulators
are now being given to augment cancer treatments261; no interactions
among these modulators, no effects on the incidence of immune reactions
during anesthesia, and no interactions with anesthetic effects have been
reported except those regarding immunosuppressant drugs (see the last
section of this chapter). Immunonutrition is increasingly being used
preprocedurally by patients and prescribed by providers to decrease
inflammatory responses.254 Whereas excellent data on the benefits of
probiotics in changing the intestinal milieu to decrease inflammation
can be found, data on probiotics' role in prevention of intestinal
complications, improvement in wound healing, incidence of perioperative
infections is under investigation, though benefits may outweigh the
risks.261a-c

Diseases of the Central Nervous System, Neuromuscular Diseases, and
Psychiatric Disorders Evaluation of a patient with neurologic or
psychiatric disease can be found in Chapter 31. Information gathered
from the history that warrants further investigation includes a previous
need for postoperative ventilation in a patient without inordinate lung
disease, which indicates the possibility of metabolic neurologic
disorders such as porphyria, myopathies, neuropathies, and neuromuscular
disorders such as myasthenia gravis. Other historical information
warranting further investigation includes the use of drugs such as the
following: steroids; guanidine; anticonvulsant, anticoagulant, and
antiplatelet drugs; lithium; tricyclic antidepressants; phenothiazines;
and butyrophenones. Although preoperative treatment of most neurologic
disorders may not lessen perioperative morbidity, knowledge of the
pathophysiologic characteristics of these disorders is important in
planning intraoperative and postoperative management. Thus preoperative
knowledge about these disorders and their associated conditions (e.g.,
cardiac arrhythmias with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, or respiratory and
cardiac muscle weakness with dermatomyositis) may reduce perioperative
morbidity. A primary goal of neurologic evaluation is to determine the
site of the lesion in the nervous system. Such localization to one of
four levels (supratentorial compartment, posterior fossa, spinal cord,
peripheral nervous system) is essential for accurate diagnosis and
appropriate management. (Disorders accompanied by increased intracranial
pressure and cerebrovascular disorders are discussed in Chapters 11 and
57.)
COMA Little is known about specific anesthetic, perioperative, or
periprocedural choices that alter outcome for a comatose patient, but as
for all other conditions, the cause of the
coma should be known so that drugs can be avoided that may worsen the
condition or that may not be metabolized because of organ dysfunction.
First, the patient should be observed. Yawning, swallowing, or licking
of the lips implies a "light" coma with major brainstem function intact.
If consciousness is depressed but respiration, pupillary reactivity to
light, and eye movements are normal and no focal motor signs are
present, metabolic depression is likely. Abnormal pupillary responses
may indicate hypoxia, hypothermia, local eye disease, or drug
intoxication with belladonna alkaloids, narcotics, benzodiazepines, or
glutethimide; pupillary responses may also be abnormal, however, after
the use of eye drops. Other metabolic causes of coma include uremia,
hypoglycemia, hepatic coma, alcohol ingestion, hypophosphatemia,
myxedema, and hyperosmolar nonketotic coma. Except in extreme
emergencies, such as uncontrolled bleeding or a perforated viscus, care
should be taken to render the patient as metabolically normal as
possible before the surgical procedure. This practice and documenting
the findings on the chart preoperatively lessen any confusion regarding
the cause of intraoperative and postoperative problems. However, too
rapid correction of uremia or hyperosmolar nonketotic coma can lead to
cerebral edema, a shift of water into the brain as a result of a reverse
osmotic effect caused by dysequilibrium of the urea concentration. The
physical examination is extremely helpful preoperatively in assessing
the prognosis. Arms flexed at the elbow (i.e., decorticate posture)
imply bilateral hemisphere dysfunction but an intact brainstem, whereas
extension of the legs and arms (bilateral decerebrate posture) implies
bilateral damage to structures at the upper brainstem or deep hemisphere
level. Seizures are often seen in patients with uremia and other
metabolic encephalopathies. Hyperreflexia and upward-pointing toes
suggest a structural CNS lesion or uremia, hypoglycemia, or hepatic
coma; hyporeflexia and downward-pointing toes with no hemiplegia
generally indicate the absence of a structural CNS lesion. It is
important to compare preoperative physical examination with previous
different providers' examinations, trending Glasgow Coma Scores can
provide utility and standardization.
EPILEPTIC SEIZURES A seizure is the term for the clinical event defined
as a paroxysmal alteration in neurologic function caused by a
synchronous, rhythmic depolarization of brain cortical neurons. Epilepsy
is the condition manifested by recurrent, unprovoked seizures. Epileptic
seizures result from paroxysmal neuronal discharges of abnormally
excitable neurons. Six percent to 10% of individuals younger than 70
years old will experience a seizure at some time during their lifetime.
Fifty percent to 70% of patients with one seizure will never have
another. However, 70% of people with two seizures will have an epileptic
focus, be candidates for antiseizure medications, and be subject to
withdrawal seizures after anesthesia if such medications are not
continued.262 Overall, epilepsy has a prevalence of 0.5% to 1% of the
population, with the highest incidence in extremes of age and in those
with anatomic neurologic abnormalities.262a Sometimes syncopal episodes
can be mistaken for seizures, especially when interviews are compressed
in the short time
frame of a preoperative visit. Twenty-five percent of patients with a
seizure have a normal electroencephalogram (EEG) when they are
interictal; thus a negative EEG result does not indicate that someone
with a seizure will not have a withdrawal seizure when emerging from
anesthesia. Seizures can be generalized (arising from deep midline
structures in the brainstem or thalamus, usually without an aura or
focal features during the seizure), partial focal motor, or sensory (the
initial discharge comes from a focal unilateral area of the brain, often
preceded by an aura). As with cerebrovascular accidents and coma,
knowing the origin may be crucial to understanding the pathophysiologic
processes of the disease and to managing the patient's intraoperative
and postoperative course. Epileptic seizures can arise from
discontinuation of sedative-hypnotic drugs or alcohol, use of narcotics,
uremia, traumatic injury, neoplasms, infection, congenital malformation,
birth injury, drug use (e.g., amphetamines, cocaine), hypercalcemia or
hypocalcemia, blood in the ventricle or hypoxia, and vascular disease
and vascular accidents. Up to 30% of patients with severe traumatic
brain injury develop early seizures (within 7 days of injury).262b
Thirty percent of epileptic seizures have no known cause. Most partial
seizures are caused by structural brain abnormalities (secondary to
tumor, trauma, stroke, infection, and other causes). Most authorities
believe that anticonvulsant medications should be given in the
therapeutic range,262-264 and they should be continued through the
morning of the surgical procedure, even in pregnant women. They should
also be given postoperatively, even in mothers who plan to breastfeed,
according to guidelines published by the American Academy of Neurology.
Many of the epileptic drugs, including phenytoin, carbamazepine, and
phenobarbiturate, alter the hepatic metabolism of many drugs and induce
cytochrome P450 enzyme activity. Drug-drug interactions are much less
problematic with the newer epileptic drugs such as gabapentin and
topirimate.262 Appropriate treatment of status epilepticus refractory to
antiepileptic drugs includes general anesthesia and carries high
morbidity.264 In one controlled trial, phenobarbital was more rapidly
effective in controlling status epilepticus than was diazepam followed
by phenytoin.264 The frequency of side effects and of required tracheal
intubation was similar for both regimens. Thus other than the use of
current drug therapy and heeding precautions taken for the underlying
disease, no known changes in perioperative management seem to be
indicated, though many agents may possess both proconvulsant and
anticonvulsant properties pending dose utilized; therefore knowledge of
anesthetics agents is crucial.
INFECTIOUS DISEASES OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM, DEGENERATIVE
DISORDERS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM, AND HEADACHE Many degenerative
CNS disorders have been traced to slowly developing viral diseases or
even the presence of certain proteins or viral particles ("prions"). No
special perioperative anesthetic considerations appear to apply for
infectious disorders of the CNS other than those for increased
intracranial pressure and avoidance of occupational exposure and
transmission of disease to healthcare workers. The appropriate
prophylactic measures to take if one comes in contact with
meningococcal disease or other infectious CNS diseases are still not
well established. The use of H. influenzae type B vaccine has made
meningitis an adult disease.265 Parkinson disease is a degenerative
disorder of the CNS that may or may not be caused by a virus.
Clinically, Parkinson disease, chronic manganese intoxication,
phenothiazine or butyrophenone toxicity, Wilson disease, Huntington
chorea, the effects of street drug toxins such as
methylphenyltetrahydropyridine, and carbon monoxide encephalopathy all
have similar initial features: bradykinesia, muscular rigidity, and
tremor. In Parkinson disease, therapy is directed at (1) increasing
presence of dopamine, (2) increasing the neuronal release of dopamine or
the receptor's response to dopamine, (3) stimulating the receptor
directly with dopamine agonists (i.e., bromocriptine), (4) direct
stimulation of dopaminergic tissue (i.e., deep brain stimulator), or (5)
decreasing cholinergic activity. Anticholinergic agents have been the
initial drugs of choice because they decrease tremor more than muscle
rigidity. Dopamine does not pass the blood-brain barrier, so its
precursor l-dopa (levodopa) is used. Unfortunately, l-dopa is
decarboxylated to dopamine in the periphery and can cause nausea,
vomiting, and arrhythmia. These side effects are diminished by the
administration of α-methylhydrazine (carbidopa), a decarboxylase
inhibitor that does not pass the blood-brain barrier. Refractoriness to
l-dopa develops, and it is now debated whether the drug should be used
only when symptoms cannot be controlled with other anticholinergic
medications. "Drug holidays" have been suggested as one means of
restoring the effectiveness of these compounds, but cessation of such
therapy may result in marked deterioration of function and need for
hospitalization. Therapy for Parkinson disease should be initiated
preoperatively and be continued through the morning of the surgical
procedure; such treatment seems to decrease drooling, the potential for
aspiration, and ventilatory weakness.266,267 Reinstituting therapy
promptly after surgery is crucial,263,266-270 as is avoiding drugs such
as the phenothiazines and butyrophenones, which inhibit the release of
dopamine or compete with dopamine at the receptor.266 Carbidopa or
levodopa in low doses (20-200 mg nightly vs. the usual 60-600 mg/day for
Parkinson disease) is commonly used in the nonparkinsonian restless leg
syndrome of older adults (present in 2%-5% of individuals \>60 years
old). This drug also should be given the night before and the night
immediately after the surgical procedure. Clozapine does not appear to
worsen the movement disorders of Parkinson disease and has been used
postoperatively to stop levodopa-induced hallucinations. Patients with
Parkinson disease may also undergo deep brain stimulation under
monitored anesthesia care. Postoperatively patients with Parkinson
disease benefit from early physical therapy, appropriate analgesia,
pulmonary hygiene, and autonomic assessment with necessary
intervention.270a Dementia, a progressive decline in intellectual
function, can be caused by treatable infections (e.g., syphilis,
cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, Lyme disease, tuberculosis),
depression (a trial of antidepressants is indicated in most patients),
side effects of medications (digitalis has slowed brain function more
than the heart rate), myxedema, vitamin B12 deficiency, chronic drug or
alcohol intoxication, metabolic causes (liver and renal failure),
neoplasms, partially treatable infections (HIV), untreatable infections
(Creutzfeldt-Jakob syndrome), or decreased acetylcholine in
the cerebral cortex (Alzheimer disease). This last condition occurs in
more than 0.5% of Americans.271-274 As of 2013, some degree of Alzheimer
disease affects approximately 11% of Americans aged 65 and older, and
affects approximately 32% of Americans aged 85 and older.274a Although
these patients are often given cholinergic agonists, controlled trials
of these drugs have not as yet shown major significant
benefit.272,273,275 Gingko has improved subjective symptoms in 37% of
patients versus 23% of those given placebo. Although further controlled
trials failed to confirm its benefit in early Alzheimer disease or in
healthy older individuals, gingko is still popular. Cholinergic
medications improve functioning in patients with Alzheimer disease.276
These families often desire surgery, but the interactions of these drugs
and therapies with perioperative analgesic and anesthetic drug therapies
are not well established. One case report noted intraoperative
bradycardia in such patients with two cholinergic drugs.277 A link may
exist among Alzheimer disease, postoperative cognitive dysfunction, and
inhaled anesthetics.278,278a Deposition of β-amyloid can occur in
animals exposed to inhaled anesthetics.279-281 Whether this link is
clinically relevant in humans remains to be determined. Most reversible
dementias represent either delirium (commonly infection, metabolic, or
drug induced) or depression.272,273,282 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (prion
driven) has been transmitted inadvertently by surgical instruments and
corneal transplants; the causative virus or protein particle is not
inactivated by heat, disinfectants, or formaldehyde. More than 90% of
patients with chronic recurring headaches are categorized as having
migraine, tension, or cluster headaches. The mechanism of tension or
cluster headaches may not differ qualitatively from that of migraine
headaches; all may be manifestations of labile vasomotor regulation.283
A headache is said to be migraine if it is characterized by four of the
following five "POUNDing" conditions: if it is Pulsating, if it lasts
One day or more, if it is Unilateral, if Nausea occurs, and if it
Disturbs daily activities.284 Treatment of cluster and migraine
headaches centers on the use of serotonin drugs such as sumatriptan or
ergotamine and its derivatives.283-285 Other drugs that may be effective
are propranolol, calcium channel inhibitors, cyproheptadine, prednisone,
antihistamines, tricyclic antidepressants, phenytoin, and diuretic
drugs, as well as biofeedback techniques. Giant cell arteritis,
glaucoma, and all the meningitides, including Lyme disease, are other
causes of headache that may benefit from preoperative treatment.286 No
other special treatment is indicated preoperatively for a patient who
has a well-delineated cause for the headaches. Acute migraine attacks
can sometimes be terminated by ergotamine tartrate aerosol or by
injection of sumatriptan or dihydroergotamine mesylate intravenously;
general anesthesia has also been used. We normally continue all
prophylactic headache medicine, although the decision to continue
aspirin through the morning of the surgical procedure is usually left to
the surgeon.
BACK PAIN, NECK PAIN, AND SPINAL CANAL SYNDROMES Acute spinal cord
injury is discussed earlier in the section on autonomic dysfunction.
Although it is a common problem,
little is written about the anesthetic management of syndromes related
to herniated disks, spondylosis (usually of advancing age), and the
congenital narrowing of the cervical and lumbar spinal canal that gives
rise to symptoms of nerve root compression. One report stresses the
importance of the vascular component in the mechanism of damage to the
spinal cord and hence the theoretic desirability of slight hypertension
perioperatively.287 Another report suggests the use of awake intubation,
a fiberoptic bronchoscope, and monitoring of evoked potentials.288
Patients with back pain may be receiving large doses of narcotics that
may influence the anesthetic plan and necessitate the need for a
perioperative multimodal analgesic approach, including the continuation
of home analgesic regimens. A thoughtful preanesthetic discussion with
the patient regarding analgesia following surgery is essential for a
successful postsurgical regimen.
DEMYELINATING DISEASES Demyelinating diseases constitute a diffuse group
of diseases ranging from those with uncertain cause (e.g., multiple
sclerosis, in which genetic, epidemiologic, and immunologic factors are
probably all involved and interferon-β appears to be a promising
treatment289) to those that follow infection, vaccination (e.g.,
Guillain-Barré syndrome), or antimetabolite treatment of cancer.
Therefore, demyelinating diseases can have very diverse symptoms, with a
risk of relapse of disease existing immediately after surgery. Because
relapse may occur as a result of rapid electrolyte changes and
hyperthermia in the perioperative period, such changes should be avoided
and temperature tightly regulated.289a In addition, perioperative
administration of steroids may be a protective measure.100 Both spinal
anesthesia and epidural anesthesia have been administered without
problems.290,291 Multiple sclerosis and demyelinating diseases in
general are the most common causes of nontraumatic disability in young
adults with a prevalence reported between 2 and 150/100,000 people.289a
The ageadjusted survival rate is 80% of that of unaffected individuals
(i.e., the average patient with multiple sclerosis ages 1.2 years for
every year with the disease). No treatment alters most of these disease
processes, although ACTH, steroids, interferon-β, glatiramer acetate
(Copaxone), and plasmapheresis may ameliorate or abbreviate a relapse,
or even alter disease progression, especially progression of multiple
sclerosis and (if started within 2 weeks of onset) GuillainBarré
syndrome.292 Such an effect is consonant with the hypothesis of an
immunologic disorder as the cause of these diseases. Care should be
taken to avoid succinylcholine in these patients because of the risk of
hyperkalemia secondary to extrajunctional acetylcholine receptors.
METABOLIC DISEASES Included in the category of metabolic diseases is
nervous system dysfunction secondary to porphyrias, alcoholism, uremia,
hepatic failure, and vitamin B12 deficiency. The periodic paralysis that
can accompany thyroid disease is discussed in the later section on
neuromuscular disorders. Alcoholism or heavy alcohol intake is
associated with the following: acute alcoholic hepatitis, the activity
of
which declines as alcohol is withdrawn; myopathy and cardiomyopathy,
which can be severe; and withdrawal syndromes. Within 6 to 8 hours of
withdrawal, the patient may become tremulous, a state that usually
subsides within days or weeks. Alcoholic hallucinosis and withdrawal
seizures generally occur within 24 to 36 hours. These seizures are
generalized grand mal attacks; when focal seizures occur, other causes
should be sought. Delirium tremens usually appears within 72 hours of
withdrawal and is often preceded by tremulousness, hallucinations, or
seizures. These three symptoms, combined with perceptual distortions,
insomnia, psychomotor disturbances, autonomic hyperactivity, and, in a
large percentage of cases, another potentially fatal illness (e.g.,
bowel infarction or subdural hematoma), are components of delirium
tremens. This syndrome is now treated with benzodiazepines. Nutritional
disorders of alcoholism include alcoholic hypoglycemia and hypothermia,
alcoholic polyneuropathy, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, and cerebellar
degeneration. In patients with alcoholism (i.e., those who drink at
least two six packs of beer or one pint of hard alcohol/ day or the
equivalent), emergency surgery and anesthesia (despite alcoholic
hepatitis), are not associated with worsening abnormalities in liver
enzymes. In addition, approximately 20% of patients with alcoholism also
have respiratory disease. Further, postoperatively these patients can
have poor wound healing, altering levels of consciousness/delirium, and
difficulty with analgesia.292a A patient who has a history of alcohol
abuse therefore warrants careful examination of many systems for
quantification of preoperative physical status.

ALA

PBG

Although hepatic failure can lead to coma with highoutput cardiac
failure, unlike uremia, it does not lead to chronic polyneuropathy.
Uremic polyneuropathy is a distal symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy
that may be improved by dialysis. The use of depolarizing muscle
relaxants in patients with polyneuropathies has been questioned. We
believe that patients who have neuropathy associated with uremia should
not be given succinylcholine because of a possible exaggerated
hyperkalemic response. Pernicious anemia caused by vitamin B12
deficiency may result in subacute combined degeneration of the spinal
cord; the signs are similar to those of chronic nitrous oxide toxicity.
Both pernicious anemia and nitrous oxide toxicity are associated with
peripheral neuropathy and disorders of the pyramidal tract and posterior
column (which governs fine motor skills and the sense of body position).
Combined-system disease can also occur without anemia, as can nitrous
oxide toxicity in dentists and nitrous oxide abusers. Patients with
vitamin B12 deficiency and anemia, if treated with folate, improve
hematologically but progress to dementia and severe neuropathy. It may
thus be prudent to give an intramuscular injection of 100 μg of vitamin
B12 or 800 μg orally before giving folate to a patient who has signs of
combined-system degeneration.293 The porphyrias are a constellation of
metabolic diseases that result from an autosomally inherited lack of
functional enzymes active in the synthesis of hemoglobin. Fig. 32.6
schematically depicts the abnormalities that result from these enzyme
deficits. Type 1, 3, and 4 porphyrias can cause life-threatening
neurologic abnormalities. These conditions are characterized by the
presence of aminolevulinic

Uroporphyrinogen I

Coproporphyrinogen I

Uroporphyrin I

Coproporphyrin I

Uroporphyrinogen III

Coproporphyrinogen III

Uroporphyrin III

Coproporphyrin III

Protoporphyrinogen

Protoporphyrin

Block here

Block here

Block here

Block here

Diagnosis:

Acute intermittent porphyria

Porphyria cutanea tarda

Coproporphyria (hereditary porphyria)

Variegate porphyria

In urine:

ALA

Uroporphyrin

PBG

1041

ALA

ALA

PBG

PBG

Neurologic sequelae:

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Drug sensitization:

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Fig. 32.6 Schematic depiction of the functional enzyme deficits that
occur in some of the porphyrias. ALA, Aminolevulinic acid; PBG,
porphobilinogen.
acid (ALA) or porphobilinogen, or both, in urine; these substances do
not occur in porphyria cutanea tarda, a disease that does not incur
neurologic sequelae.294 In acute intermittent porphyria, the typical
pattern consists of acute attacks of colicky pain, nausea, vomiting,
severe constipation, psychiatric disorders, and lesions of the lower
motoneuron that can progress to bulbar paralysis. Often, these patients
will have had multiple previous surgeries. Certain drugs can induce the
enzyme ALA synthetase and thereby exacerbate the disease process.295-297
Drugs considered unsafe include barbiturates (all types), phenytoin,
valproic acid, carbamazepine, primidone, oral contraceptives,
progestins, carisoprodol, and sprinolactone.297a Clonazepam, ketamine,
imipramine, sulfa antibiotics, erythromycin, fluconazole,
nitrofurantoin, and rifampicin are considered possibly unsafe and should
be used with caution.297a Patients can have attacks during infection,
fasting, or menstruation. Administration of glucose suppresses ALA
synthetase activity and prevents or ablates acute attacks. Drugs used in
anesthetic management that are reported to be safe for patients with
porphyria include neostigmine, atropine, succinylcholine, nitrous oxide,
procaine, propofol, etomidate, meperidine, fentanyl, morphine,
droperidol, promazine, promethazine, and chlorpromazine.295-297 Although
ketamine has previously been used, postoperative psychoses attributable
to the disease may be difficult to distinguish from those possibly
caused by ketamine. Propofol has been used without provoking porphyria
in at least two susceptible patients.295,296

NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS Neuromuscular disorders consist of conditions
affecting any major component of the motor unit: motoneuron, peripheral
nerve, neuromuscular junction, and muscle. Neuropathies may involve all
components of the nerve, thereby producing sensory, motor, and autonomic
dysfunction, or only one component. Myopathies may involve the proximal
muscles, the distal muscles, or both. Myasthenia gravis is a disorder of
the muscular system caused by partial blockade or destruction of
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by IgG antibodies. The severity of the
disease correlates with the ability of antibodies to decrease the number
of available acetylcholine receptors.298 Treatment of myasthenia is
usually begun with anticholinesterase drugs, but in moderate and severe
disease, treatment progresses to steroids and thymectomy.298,299
Immunosuppressive drugs and plasmapheresis are initiated if the more
conservative measures fail, and intravenous immunoglobulin, a
rapid-onset therapy, is reserved for acute exacerbations and myasthenic
crises.298,299 One major problem for the anesthesiologist involves the
use of muscle relaxants and their reversal.300 Because much of the care
of patients with myasthenia gravis involves tailoring the amount of
anticholinesterase medication to the maximal muscle strength of the
patient, derangement of the course of the patient during the surgical
procedure could necessitate reassessment of the drug dosage. For that
reason, all anticholinergic drugs may be withheld for 6 hours
preoperatively, and medication should be reinstituted postoperatively
with extreme caution because the sensitivity of these patients to such
drugs may have changed. Small

doses of succinylcholine can be used to facilitate endotracheal
intubation; extremely small doses of nondepolarizing drugs can be used
for intraoperative relaxation not achieved by regional anesthesia or
volatile anesthetics. Of prime importance is monitoring neuromuscular
blockade as the guide for muscle relaxant administration and their
reversal. Previously, controlled mechanical ventilation was frequently
required for 24 to 48 hours postoperatively; however, immediate
extubation has become more common.299-301 Postoperative ventilation is
especially important in patients with myasthenia gravis of more than 6
years' duration, COPD, a daily pyridostigmine requirement of 750 mg in
association with significant bulbar weakness, and vital capacity of less
than 40 mL/kg (PFTs are an important part of the preoperative
workup).301 One study in myasthenic patients found rapid recovery of
neuromuscular function in patients receiving rocuronium when sugammadex
was used for reversal.302 This combination could be a rational
alternative for myasthenic patients for whom neuromuscular blockade is
mandatory during surgical procedures. Another study found that epidural
analgesia intraand postoperatively reduced the requirement of mechanical
ventilation following thymectomy, though this was retrospective in
nature.302a This technique may provide benefit and allow for minimal use
of muscle relaxation. Lambert-Eaton syndrome (myasthenic syndrome) is
characterized by proximal limb muscle weakness and is associated with
antibodies directed against the voltagegated calcium channels in
presynaptic nerve terminals. Strength or reflexes typically increase
with repetitive effort, as affected patients exhibit decreased release
of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction and repetitive use
increases the available junctional acetylcholine. Guanidine therapy
enhances the release of acetylcholine from nerve terminals and improves
strength. Men with this syndrome generally have small cell carcinoma of
the lung or other malignant disease, whereas women often have malignant
disease, sarcoidosis, thyroiditis, or a collagen-related vascular
disease. In addition, these patients have increased sensitivity to both
depolarizing and nondepolarizing muscle relaxants.303 These patients
have an increased risk of prolonged muscle weakness or postoperative
respiratory failure after exposure to neuromuscular blocking drugs,
particularly when untreated preoperatively.303a Lambert-Eaton syndrome
is also associated with an autonomic nervous system defect manifested by
gastroparesis, orthostatic hypotension, and urinary retention.
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are characterized by proximal limb
muscle weakness with dysphagia. These conditions are associated with
malignant disease or collagen-related vascular disease and often involve
respiratory and cardiac muscle. Periodic paralysis is another disease in
which sensitivity to muscle relaxants increases. Periodic weakness
starts in childhood or adolescence and is precipitated by rest after
exercise, sleep, cold, surgery, or pregnancy. Hypokalemic and
hyperkalemic forms exist and are associated with cardiac arrhythmias.
Like thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, these hypokalemic and hyperkalemic
forms usually spare the respiratory muscles. Anesthetic management
consists of minimizing stress, maintaining normal fluid and electrolyte
status, and controlling body temperature.303-306
Patients with muscular dystrophy now survive into their late 20s or
early 30s. Because the disease involves the muscles themselves and not
their innervation, conduction anesthesia cannot produce adequate
relaxation of tonic muscles. Gastric dilation is also a problem. As with
the other forms of muscular dystrophy, most problems in myotonic
dystrophy arise from cardiac arrhythmias and inadequacy of the
respiratory muscles.307 The preoperative workup for all muscular
dystrophies should include echocardiography and PFTs.307a For all the
forms of muscular dystrophy, problems have been related to exaggerated
release of serum potassium after the administration of depolarizing
muscle relaxants. Volatile anesthetics are associated with
anesthesia-induced rhabdomyolysis, hyperkalemia, and cardiac arrest;
therefore, total intravenous anesthesia is the preferred method of
general anesthesia. Of note, sugammadex has been used with success for
muscle relaxation reversal.307a Malignant hyperthermia in the patient or
in a relative of the patient merits careful history taking and at least
consideration of performing a test for susceptibility to the condition.
Prophylaxis with intravenous dantrolene sodium may also be warranted
with high risk patients. Through genotyping malignant hyperthermia has
been associated with central core disease, multiminicore myopathy,
congenital myopathy with cores and rods, centronuclear myopathy,
congenital fiber type disproportion, KingDenborough syndrome, periodic
paralysis, nemaline rod myopathy, Native American myopathy, and
idiopathic hyperCKemia.307b Further genotyping has demonstrated that
Duchene muscular dystrophy and Beck muscular dystrophy are better
classified as a nonmalignant hyperthermia anesthetic-induced
rhabdomyolysis, despite similar clinical appearances.307b Appropriate
preparation for a patient with previous masseter spasm, or trismus,
remains a matter of considerable debate. Malignant hyperthermia occurs
most frequently in children and adolescents; the incidence is 1 in
14,000 administrations of anesthesia. The incidence increases to 1 in
2500 patients requiring strabismus surgery.

DOWN SYNDROME Down syndrome (trisomy 21) occurs once in 1000 live
births. It is associated with congenital cardiac lesions such as
endocardial cushion defects (40%), ventricular septal defects (27%),
patent ductus arteriosus (12%), and tetralogy of Fallot (8%).
Prophylactic antibiotics should be used before predictable bacteremic
events. Down syndrome is also associated with upper respiratory
infections, with atlantooccipital instability (in approximately 15% of
patients308-311) and laxity of other joints, with thyroid hypofunction
(50%), with an increased incidence of subglottic stenosis, and with
enlargement of the tongue (or a decreased oral cavity size for a
normal-sized tongue).310,312 Often, the atlantooccipital instability is
asymptomatic and undiagnosed, so all patients should be treated as
though they have atlantooccipital instability. No abnormal responses to
anesthetic agents or anesthetic adjuvants have been substantiated. A
reported sensitivity to atropine has been disproved, although
administration of atropine to any patient receiving digoxin for atrial
fibrillation should be done with care.312 Examination
for the conditions associated with Down syndrome should precede surgery.

PREOPERATIVE PREDICTION OF INCREASED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE DURING
NEUROSURGERY Symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure
include morning headache or headache made worse by coughing, nausea,
vomiting, disturbances in consciousness, history of large tumors, tumors
involving the brainstem, neck rigidity, and papilledema. Patients with
these signs, large ventricles (as seen on radiography or images of the
brain), or edema surrounding supratentorial tumors should be considered
at risk for intraoperative intracranial hypertension. These patients may
benefit from preoperative treatment or anesthetic management that
assumes this possibility.313

MENTAL DISORDERS Perhaps the most important preoperative consideration
for patients with mental disorders, in addition to developing rapport,
is understanding their specific drug therapy and its effects and side
effects. Lithium, tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), other antidepressants that defy
classification (e.g., bupropion), phenothiazines, butyrophenones, and
MAOIs are used in these patients.314 These drugs have potent effects and
side effects that are discussed in the last section of this chapter, on
drug therapy.

Renal Disease and Electrolyte Disorders The anesthesiologist has an
important role to play in preventing the onset and consequences of renal
failure and its initiators. The linking of renal failure to electrolyte
disorders is more obvious: the kidney is the primary organ for
regulating body osmolality and fluid volume and has a major role in
excretion of the end products of metabolism. In performing these
functions, the kidney becomes intimately involved in the excretion of
electrolytes. A patient with renal insufficiency whose own kidneys are
still functioning is distinct not only from a patient with end-stage
renal disease whose renal functions are provided by dialysis but also
from a patient who has a transplanted kidney. These three groups of
patients require very different preoperative preparation. In addition,
acute changes in renal function present quite a different problem than
do chronic alterations in function. Certain renal diseases require
different preoperative preparation than others, but generally, renal
disease of any origin presents the same preoperative problems.

RENAL DISEASE Causes and Systemic Effects of Renal Disorders Nephrotic
syndrome may develop in patients with glomerular diseases without
disturbing tubular function. The soundness of tubular function is an
important consideration
because tubular dysfunction with attendant uremia presents problems
quite different from those presented by glomerular disease with only
nephrotic syndrome. This is not to minimize the adverse effects of
glomerular disease; nephrotic syndrome consists of massive proteinuria
and consequent hypoalbuminemia. The resulting reduction in plasma
oncotic pressure diminishes plasma volume and calls forth compensatory
mechanisms that result in retention of sodium and water. As a result, a
common clinical finding in nephrotic syndrome is diffuse edema. Thus
patients with nephrotic syndrome may have excess total-body water and
decreased intravascular volume. In addition, diuretics are often given
in an attempt to decrease edema. Although serum creatinine and
creatinine clearance estimations have limitations as indices of the GFR
(insulin clearance is the reference standard), these measurements are,
for now, the most readily available to the anesthesiologist. Plasma
creatinine levels reflect endogenous muscle catabolism and dietary
intake, as well as urinary excretion. Urinary excretion depends on both
filtration and secretion by the kidney. Drugs that are commonly used in
the preoperative and perioperative periods can distort this measure of
glomerular filtration. Moreover, the commonly used methods for measuring
creatinine have a 95% confidence limit of greater than 20% for a GFR
higher than 30 mL/min. Thus a normal creatinine level of 1.3 mg/dL may
give a measured value ranging from 1.1 to 1.5 mg/dL. Furthermore, in
patients with nephrotic syndrome in whom renal tubular function has been
preserved, hypovolemia appears to be a significant cause of
deteriorating tubular renal function.315-317 No randomized study has
shown that close control of intravascular volume status in these groups
of patients preserves renal tubular function (or any other measure of
perioperative morbidity) to a greater degree than does less rigid
control. Uremia, the end result of renal tubular failure (i.e., failure
of the concentrating, diluting, acidifying, and filtering functions)
manifests in many ways. Changes occur in the cardiovascular,
immunologic, hematologic, neuromuscular, pulmonary, and endocrine
systems, as well as in bone. These alterations are ascribed either to
the toxic end products of protein metabolism or to an imbalance in
functioning of the kidney. As the number of functioning nephrons
diminishes, the still-functioning nephrons attempt to increase some
solute and body composition preservation functions at the expense of
other functions, such as excretion of phosphate. The accumulation of
phosphate increases PTH levels, which in turn produce osteodystrophy.
Osteodystrophy can be managed by (1) restriction of dietary phosphate,
(2) the use of binding agents (e.g., aluminum hydroxide or carbonate)
that bind with intestinal phosphate, (3) calcium supplementation, or (4)
parathyroidectomy. Certain alterations in patients with uremia, such as
neuropathy, are most logically attributed to an accumulation of toxic
metabolites. Peripheral neuropathy is most often sensory and involves
the lower extremities, but it may also be motor; peripheral neuropathies
are frequently improved with hemodialysis and can be dramatically
reversed with renal transplantation. Tubular function is commonly
assessed by acidifying and concentrating capabilities.318 Although such
tests are crude, these capabilities are usually readily evaluated by
measuring urine pH and specific gravity. Along with the altered volume
status and cardiac complications in uremic patients, autonomic
neuropathy

may contribute to hypotension during anesthesia. Atherosclerosis is
often accelerated in uremic patients; hypertension, with its attendant
consequences, is very common. Cardiac failure frequently occurs in
uremic patients because of the presence of many adverse conditions:
anemia with increasing myocardial work, hypertension, atherosclerosis,
and altered volume status. Pericarditis can manifest by pericardial rub
alone or by pain (with or without hemorrhage), the ECG will show diffuse
ST changes in multiple coronary distributions---when available, these
should be correlated to previous coronary catherization findings.
Cardiac tamponade should be ruled out on the basis of clinical features
and by echocardiography if this diagnosis is seriously suspected
preoperatively. In addition, cardiac tamponade should be treated or
planned for preoperatively. If anemia is present, its severity generally
parallels the degree of uremia; chronically uremic patients seem to
adapt well to anemia. No hard data have substantiated the need to give a
preoperative blood transfusion to a chronically uremic patient, even
when the preoperative hemoglobin is approaching 7 g/dL. Even in
nonuremic patients in an ICU and during cardiac surgery, randomized
trials were unable to demonstrate improved outcomes with a liberal
transfusion strategy,319 and transfusions increase the risk for immune
system compromise.320,321a In uremic patients, coagulation and platelet
adhesiveness may be abnormal, and factor VIII and von Willebrand factor
activity may be decreased; often, these patients may require DDAVP for
enhancement of coagulation intraoperatively. However, DDAVP must be used
with caution as it can lead to fluid retention and hypotension with
rapid infusion.321b Uremic patients exhibit a wide variety of metabolic
and endocrinologic disorders in addition to hyperparathyroidism,
including impaired carbohydrate tolerance, insulin resistance, type IV
hyperlipoproteinemia, autonomic insufficiency, hyperkalemia, and
anion-gap acidosis (caused by an inability of the kidneys to reabsorb
filtered bicarbonate and excrete sufficient ammonium into urine).
Furthermore, the excretion and pharmacokinetics of drugs are different
in uremic patients than in normal patients. In addition, complications
of hemodialysis include nutritional deficiencies, electrolyte and fluid
imbalances, and mental disorders. Because these conditions can lead to
serious perioperative morbidity, they should be evaluated
preoperatively. As with uremic patients, preoperative optimization of
volume status is paramount in patients with kidney stones, and both are
affected by carbohydrate intolerance.321,322 Seventy-five percent of all
kidney stones are composed of calcium oxalate. Patients with these
stones frequently take diuretic drugs, consume calcium- and citrate-rich
foods, and restrict salt intake. Prevention of dehydration by
institution of intravenous fluid therapy along with restricted oral
intake of protein may be as important for these patients as it is for
patients with struvite or uric acid stones. Struvite stones often result
from urinary infection. Uric acid stones can be prevented by treatment
with allopurinol, by preoperative hydration, or by alkalinization of
urine. Acidosis may contribute to stone formation. Again, optimal
intravascular volume status is important in preventing stones and
preserving renal function. More thorough discussion of renal function
and physiology is provided in Chapter 17. Chapter 59 deals with the
complexities of managing patients for renal surgery and other urologic
procedures.
Creatinine clearance in conjunction with free water clearance appears to
be the most accurate way of quantifying, for pharmacokinetic purposes,
the degree of decreased renal function.322 For a patient with stable
renal function, creatinine clearance, which is a rough estimate of GFR,
can be approximated by noting the serum creatinine level: a doubling of
the creatinine level represents a halving of the GFR. Thus a patient
with a stable serum creatinine level of 2 mg/dL would have a GFR of
approximately 60 mL/min. A stable serum creatinine level of 4 mg/dL
would accompany a GFR of approximately 30 mL/min, and a stable serum
creatinine level of 8 mg/dL would accompany a GFR of 15 mL/min or less.

Free water clearance is a measure of renal concentrating ability, and it
is normally −25 to +100 mL/h; it becomes more positive in renal
insufficiency states. It may also become more positive in patients who
have a head injury or high blood alcohol levels or in those undergoing
aggressive fluid infusion or administration of diuretics.323

Patients With Insufficient but Functioning Kidneys One of the greatest
challenges for the anesthesiologist is presented by patients with
insufficient renal function whose renal function must be preserved
during surgical procedures. In addition, the presence of chronic renal
failure is associated with higher rates of perioperative cardiac
morbidity, which may warrant further evaluation for the presence of
occult CAD.324 The many uremic symptoms and great perioperative
morbidity associated with uremia can probably be avoided by attention to
detail in the preoperative and perioperative management of patients with
insufficient but still functioning kidneys.315-317 First, studies
demonstrate that acute postoperative renal failure is associated with an
extremely high mortality rate.325 The development of perioperative renal
dysfunction has multiple risk factors, the most important of which
include preexisting renal disease, heart surgery involving
cardiopulmonary bypass or aortic surgery involving crossclamping of the
thoracic or abdominal aorta, and ongoing sepsis. Perioperative renal
dysfunction accounts for upward of 40% of all in-hospital cases of acute
kidney injury.325a Moreover, acute perioperative renal failure is most
likely to occur in patients who have renal insufficiency before the
surgical procedure, are older than 60 years, and have preoperative left
ventricular dysfunction.323,325 Proper preoperative hydration probably
decreases mortality after acute renal failure induced by radiocontrast
agents.317 Clues to the presence of hypovolemia or hypervolemia should
be sought from the history and physical examination (e.g., weight loss
or gain, thirst, edema, orthostatic hypotension and tachycardia, flat
neck veins, dry mucous membranes, decreased skin turgor). Other causes
of deterioration in function in chronic renal insufficiency are low
cardiac output or low renal blood flow (in prerenal azotemia, whether
because of cardiac failure or fluid depletion from diuretic drugs, BUN
often increases disproportionately to increases in creatinine), urinary
tract infection, use of nephrotoxic drugs, hypercalcemia, and
hyperuricemia. These conditions and drugs should be avoided; if any of
these conditions exist, they should be treated preoperatively.
Management of patients with renal disease is discussed in Chapter 59.

Patients Undergoing Dialysis Patients with chronic (and at times acute)
renal failure require renal replacement therapy, including conventional
intermittent hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT). CRRT includes a wide variety of techniques
whose perioperative management has been reviewed (Table 32.13).326
Although the primary indication for CRRT is acute renal failure, it can
also be used for fluid clearance, correction of electrolyte
abnormalities, management of metabolic acidosis, and removal of some
toxins. It can be used in surgical patients without significant
hemodynamic abnormalities. These patients may return to the operating
room, and their assessment and management may be complicated by the
underlying disease and the use of systemic anticoagulation to prevent
filter and circuit clotting. In patients undergoing intermittent
treatment with hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, the procedure is
discontinued before entering the operating room. For patients on CRRT,
the anesthesiologist must determine the appropriateness of discontinuing
the therapy. With short procedures,

TABLE 32.13 Characteristics of Renal Replacement Therapy Renal
Replacement Therapy

Blood Pump

Replacement Fluid (RF)/Dialysate (D)

Intraoperative Use

Conventional intermittent hemodialysis

Yes

D

No

Peritoneal dialysis

No

D

No

Slow continuous ultrafiltration

Yes/no

None

Yes

Continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis

No

D

No

Continuous arteriovenous hemodiafiltration

No

RF/D

No

Continuous venovenous hemofiltration

Yes

RF

Yes

Continuous venovenous hemodialysis

Yes

D

Yes

Continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration

Yes

RF/D

Yes

From Petroni KC, Cohen NH. Continuous renal replacement therapy:
anesthetic implications. Anesth Analg. 2002;94:1288--1297.
the therapy can usually be stopped safely provided the initial
indication for therapy has improved (i.e., resolution of acidosis or
hyperkalemia). If continued, CRRT can also be used to manage fluids
during the surgical procedure by changing the dialysate, but the effect
on drug dosing must be recognized. In addition to effects on renal
elimination of drugs, CRRT has effects resulting from changes in protein
binding and volume of distribution, as well as drug removal effects from
membrane permeability, membrane surface area, the ultrafiltration rate,
and the dialysate flow rate. Because a patient undergoing conventional
dialysis has already lost natural renal functioning, the emphasis in
preoperative assessment shifts toward protecting other organ systems and
optimally maintaining vascular access sites for cannulation. Usually,
this does not require invasive monitoring. Emphasis is placed on
intravascular fluid volume and electrolyte status, which can be
ascertained by knowing when the patient last underwent dialysis, how
much weight was normally gained or lost with dialysis, whether the fluid
loss was peritoneal or intravascular, and what electrolyte composition
the blood was dialyzed against. Although preoperative dialysis may
benefit patients who have hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia, acidosis,
neuropathy, and fluid overload, the resulting dysequilibrium between
fluid and electrolytes can cause problems. Because hypovolemia induced
by dialysis can lead to intraoperative hypotension, we try to avoid
weight and fluid reduction in patients undergoing preoperative dialysis
focusing on clearance of solutes and management of acid-base balance.
When renal transplant recipients have subsequent surgical procedures,
the status of their renal function must be determined (i.e., whether
they have normal renal function, insufficient but still functioning
kidneys, or end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis).
Descriptions of side effects of immunosuppressive drugs should also be
sought. The drugs used preoperatively and intraoperatively to prevent
acute rejection themselves have serious side effects that encourage
close monitoring of blood glucose and cardiovascular function.327
Because renal transplantation greatly increases the risk of infection,
it is very important to consider invasive monitoring carefully and if
indicated follow strict aseptic technique.

Drugs in Patients With Renal Failure Patients with renal azotemia have a
threefold or higher risk of having an adverse drug reaction than do
patients with normal renal function.328-330 The risk is increased by two
conditions. First, excessive pharmacologic effects result from high
levels of a drug or its metabolite (e.g., the metabolite of meperidine)
in blood because of physiologic changes in target tissues induced by the
uremic state. An example is excessive sedation in a uremic patient with
standard blood levels of sedative-hypnotic drugs. Second, excessive
administration of electrolytes with drugs also increases the risk of
having an adverse drug reaction. Administration of standard doses of
drugs that depend on renal excretion for their elimination can result in
drug accumulation and enhanced pharmacologic effect. In one report,
patients with end-stage renal disease required significantly higher
propofol doses to achieve the clinical endpoint of hypnosis than did
patients with normal renal function.330

INFECTIOUS DISEASE Sepsis is a leading cause of postoperative
morbidity,317,331 probably through a decrease in systemic vascular
resistance

related to activation of the complement system and other mediators. Thus
attention to the effects of antibiotic drugs must be supplemented by
attention to intravascular volume status.315-317,331-333 The degree of
impairment of the infected organ and its effect on anesthesia should be
assessed. Further, note that not all sepsis is the same, and often the
source requires special consideration. For instance, endocarditis merits
examination of the following: intravascular volume status; antibiotic
and other drug therapy and side effects334; myocardial function; and
renal, pulmonary, neurologic, and hepatic function---organ systems that
can be affected by endocarditis. Although all surgery except emergency
or essential operations is proscribed when an acute infectious disease
is present, many such diseases (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal
pneumonia) and even inflammatory conditions are becoming less frequent
because of successful immunization recommendations and programs.335
Furthermore, even though acute infections are less common, surgery in
patients with chronic viral diseases such as hepatitis and HIV infection
is more frequent. Many of these patients may also harbor opportunistic
infections such as tuberculosis or may have other systemic problems.
Whether anesthesia or surgery, or both, exacerbates these infections or
their systemic manifestations is not clear.

ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS Disorders of calcium, magnesium, and phosphate
balance are discussed in the earlier section on diseases involving the
endocrine system and disorders of nutrition.

Hyponatremia and Hypernatremia Electrolyte disorders are usually
detected by determining the levels of electrolytes in serum. These
concentrations reflect the balance between water and electrolytes. The
osmolality of all body fluids is normally maintained within the narrow
physiologic range of 285 to 295 mOsm/kg H2O by integration of three key
processes: thirst, release of ADH, and responsiveness of the medullary
collecting ducts to ADH. Because of the permeability of biologic
membranes, intracellular osmolality and extracellular osmolality are
almost always equal.

Hyponatremia is the most common electrolyte disorder in hospitalized
patients, with a prevalence in ICUs patients as high as 40%,
highlighting hyponatremia as a common and important clinical condition
that adds complexity to the care.335a Hyponatremia can occur in
isotonic, hypertonic, or hypotonic forms. For example, isotonic
hyponatremia can develop in protein or liquid accumulation states such
as myeloma. Hypertonic hyponatremia can be present with hyperglycemia or
with infusions of glycine (as in the TURP syndrome). Hypotonic
hyponatremia is the largest classification and is subdivided according
to the status of the extracellular fluid into hypovolemic, isovolumic,
or hypervolemic hypotonic hyponatremia. All three types require that
excretion of renal water be impaired despite continued intake of dilute
fluid. Common causes of hypovolemic
BOX 32.5 Types and Causes of Hypotonic Hyponatremia Hypovolemic
Gastrointestinal losses □ Vomiting □ Diarrhea □ Skin losses □
Third-space losses □ Lung losses □ Renal losses □ Diuretics □ Renal
damage □ Urinary tract obstruction □ Adrenal insufficiency □

Isovolumic S yndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
Renal failure □ Water intoxication □ Hypokalemia □ Dysfunctional
osmostat □ □

Hypervolemic  ongestive heart failure C Nephrosis □ Liver dysfunction □
□

Serum osmolality less than 280 mOsm/L.

hypotonic hyponatremia are GI losses (vomiting, diarrhea), third-space
losses (diuretics or salt-wasting nephropathy), and adrenal
insufficiency (Box 32.5). Hypervolemic hypotonic hyponatremic states
complicate severe cardiac failure, cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, and
renal failure, and are characterized by retention of sodium with
disproportionately larger amounts of water. The most common isovolumic
hypotonic hyponatremia is caused by retention of water without sodium,
often edema is not usually clinically apparent. Edema is most often
caused by SIADH, which in turn may be caused by CNS or pulmonary tumors
or dysfunction. Secretion of ADH increases with age, thus rendering
older adults more prone to hyponatremia. Drugs that potentiate the
secretion of ADH (tricyclic antidepressants and vincristine) or its
effects on the medullary collecting duct system in the kidney
(nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and thiazides) or that have similar
effects (oxytocin and desmopressin) may be more likely to cause
hyponatremia in older adults. To establish the diagnosis of SIADH, the
physician should determine that the patient is free of renal and cardiac
dysfunction, has normal adrenal and thyroid function, and is
normovolemic---it is a diagnosis of exclusion. Urine osmolality would
then be found to exceed 100 mOsm/kg, serum osmolality would be low, and
urine sodium excretion would be higher than 20 mEq/L (20 mOsm/L).
Disturbances in serum sodium therefore may reflect alterations in
glucose metabolism, renal function, or accumulation of body water. The
last can be affected by disturbances in thirst, release of ADH, and
renal function. Thus hyponatremia reflects a relative excess of free
water and can occur when total-body sodium increases (as in edematous
disorders), when total-body sodium is normal (as in excess of free water
because of SIADH), or when total-body sodium decreases (as
occurs with too aggressive use of diuretic drugs). Definition of the
cause defines the treatment. For instance, water restriction is the
mainstay of therapy for SIADH. Administration of demeclocycline is
another option that corrects severe SIADH by inducing a reversible
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The anesthesiologist is faced with the
question of which levels of electrolytes require treatment before
anesthesia. Although slowly developing hyponatremia usually produces few
symptoms, the patient may be lethargic, apathetic, or unbalanced.
Chronic hyponatremia is better tolerated than acute hyponatremia because
of mechanisms regulating intracellular fluid volume that alleviate brain
edema; the loss of other solutes from cells decreases the osmotic
movement of water into cells. Nonetheless, severe chronic hyponatremia
(i.e., serum sodium levels \<123 mEq/L) can cause the development of
brain edema. By contrast, acute hyponatremia may be manifested by severe
symptoms requiring emergency treatment: profound cerebral edema with
obtundation, coma, convulsions, and disordered reflexes and
thermoregulatory control.100,101,336 Depending on the cause and relative
total sodium and water content, treatment can range from the
administration of hypertonic saline (with or without diuretic drugs) to
restriction of fluids or administration of other drugs.100,101,336
Because neurologic damage may develop if the serum sodium concentration
is increased too rapidly, the rate of increase should not exceed 1
mEq/L/h.100,101,336 After the serum sodium concentration has reached 125
mEq/L, therapy may consist of water restriction; more rapid correction
may result in the osmotic demyelination syndrome.335a In hyponatremic
patients who have excess total-body water secondary to SIADH, serum
levels can be corrected by giving furosemide and saline to replace the
loss of electrolytes in urine.100,101,336 The diagnosis of SIADH is
discussed earlier in this chapter (see the section on pituitary
abnormalities). Neither acute nor chronic hyponatremia necessitates
restoration of serum sodium to normal levels, just until resolution of
neurologic symptoms; brain swelling usually resolves at a serum sodium
level of 130 mEq/L. Hypernatremia occurs much less commonly than
hyponatremia. It is often iatrogenic (e.g., it can be caused by failure
to provide sufficient free water to a patient who is unconscious or who
has had a recent stroke-induced deficit of the thirst mechanism) and can
occur in the presence of low, normal, or excess total-body sodium. The
primary symptoms of hypernatremia relate to brain cell shrinkage.
Because too rapid correction of hypernatremia can lead to cerebral edema
and possibly osmotic demyelination syndrome with convulsions, coma, and
death; correction should be made gradually. Despite lack of data, there
is general belief that all patients undergoing surgical procedures
should have serum sodium concentrations of less than 150 mEq/L before
anesthesia unless a therapeutic for hypernatremia exists (i.e.,
hypertonic therapy for cerebral edema in neurologic injury).

Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia are also
discussed in Chapters 31 and 47. The relationship between the measured
potassium concentration in serum and total-body potassium stores can
best be described with a scattergram. Only 2% of total-body potassium is
stored in plasma (4200 mEq in cells and 60 mEq in extracellular fluid).
In normal persons, 75% of the 50 to 60 mEq/L of total-body potassium is
stored in skeletal muscle, 6% in red blood cells, and 5% in the liver.
Thus a 20% to 25% change in potassium levels in plasma could represent a
change in total-body potassium of 1000 mEq or more if the change were
chronic or as little as 10 to 20 mEq if the change were acute. As with
serum sodium levels, acute changes in serum potassium levels are less
well tolerated than chronic changes. Chronic changes are relatively well
tolerated because of the equilibration of serum and intracellular stores
that takes place over time to return the resting membrane potential of
excitable cells to nearly normal levels. Hyperkalemia can result from
the following: factitious increase of potassium administration (as in
red blood cell hemolysis); excessive exogenous potassium from sources
such as salt substitutes; cellular shifts in potassium (as a result of
metabolic acidosis, tissue and muscle damage after burns, use of
depolarizing muscle relaxants, or intense catabolism of protein); and
decreased renal excretion (as occurs in renal failure, renal
insufficiency with trauma, and therapy with potassium-sparing diuretic
drugs, especially when combined with ACE inhibitors or mineralocorticoid
deficiency).337-339 Factitious hyperkalemia can occur when a tourniquet
is left on too long or even by simple fist clenching.340 The major
danger in anesthetizing patients who have disorders of potassium balance
appears to be abnormal cardiac function (i.e., both electrical
disturbances and poor cardiac contractility).337 Hyperkalemia lowers the
resting membrane potential of excitable cardiac cells and decreases the
duration of the myocardial action potential and upstroke velocity. This
decreased rate of ventricular depolarization, in addition to the
beginning of repolarization in some areas of the myocardium while other
areas are still undergoing depolarization, produces a progressively
widening QRS complex that merges with the T wave into a sine wave on the
ECG. At a potassium level greater than 6.7 mEq/L, the degree of
hyperkalemia and the duration of the QRS complex correlate well.337 This
correlation is even better than the correlation between the serum
potassium level and T-wave changes. Nevertheless, the earliest
manifestations of hyperkalemia are narrowing and peaking of the T wave.
Although not diagnostic of hyperkalemia, T waves are almost invariably
peaked and narrow when serum potassium levels are 7 to 9 mEq/L. When
serum potassium levels exceed 7 mEq/L, atrial conduction disturbances
appear, as manifested by a decrease in P-wave amplitude and an increase
in the PR interval. Supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation,
PVCs, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, or sinus arrest
may all occur. The ECG and cardiac alterations associated with
hyperkalemia are potentiated by low serum levels of calcium and sodium.
Intravenous administration of bicarbonate, glucose with insulin (1
unit/2 g glucose), can reverse these changes temporarily by shifting
extracellular potassium into the cells. Calcium is administered to
stabilize the cardiac membrane; it has no effect on plasma
concentrations of potassium. Furosemide should be given to start the
removal process of excess potassium from the body and decrease serum
potassium levels. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) enemas can
be given to bind potassium in the gut in exchange for sodium, these
should be used with caution in perioperative patients as there are
reports of intestinal necrosis.340a,340b Dialysis against a hypokalemic
solution also decreases serum potassium levels.

β-Adrenergic stimuli also cause redistribution of potassium into the
cell. Indeed, the plasma potassium concentration measured in samples
immediately before surgical procedures is usually 0.2 to 0.8 mEq/L lower
than that measured during the less stressful period 1 to 3 days before
surgery.341 β-Adrenergic receptor blocking drugs can be used to prevent
such an effect preoperatively. A β-adrenergic receptor stimulating agent
(20 mg of nebulized albuterol for a 70-kg patient) can be used to treat
hyperkalemia when it occurs; it decreases potassium levels 1.0 mEq/L
within 30 minutes, and its effect lasts 2 hours.342 Although nebulized
β2-agonists effectively lower plasma potassium concentrations by
stimulating sodium- and potassium-dependent adenosine triphosphatase,
this therapy should be used as an adjunct to rather than a substitute
for more established measures. In a hyperkalemic patient,
hypoventilation can be dangerous during anesthesia because each 0.1
change in pH can produce a 0.4 to 1.5 mEq/L change in serum potassium
levels in the opposite direction. For example, if pH decreases from 7.4
to 7.3, serum potassium levels could increase from 5.5 to 6.5 mEq/L.
Hypokalemia can be caused by inadequate intake of potassium, excessive
GI loss (through diarrhea, vomiting, nasopharyngeal suctioning,
long-term use of laxatives, or ingestion of cation exchange resins, as
in certain wines), excessive renal loss (because of the use of diuretic
drugs, renal tubular acidosis, chronic chloride deficiency, metabolic
alkalosis, mineralocorticoid excess, excessive ingestion of licorice,
use of antibiotics, ureterosigmoidostomy, and diabetic ketoacidosis),
and shifts of potassium from extracellular to intracellular compartments
(as occurs in alkalosis, insulin administration, administration of a
β-adrenergic agonist, stress, barium poisoning, and periodic paralysis).
As with hyperkalemia, knowledge of the cause of the potassium deficiency
and appropriate preoperative evaluation and treatment of that cause may
be as important as treatment of the deficiency itself. Also like
hyperkalemia, hypokalemia may reflect small or vast changes in
total-body potassium. Acute hypokalemia may be much less well tolerated
than chronic hypokalemia. The major worrisome manifestations of
hypokalemia pertain to the circulatory system, both the cardiac and
peripheral components. In addition, chronic hypokalemia results in
muscle weakness, hypoperistalsis, and nephropathy. Cardiovascular
manifestations of hypokalemia include the following: autonomic
neuropathy, orthostatic hypotension, decreased sympathetic reserve,
impaired myocardial contractility, and electrical conduction
abnormalities. Conduction abnormalities can present as sinus
tachycardia, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, and intraventricular
conduction disturbances that can progress to ventricular fibrillation.
In addition to arrhythmias, the ECG shows widening of the QRS complex,
ST-segment abnormalities, progressive diminution of the T-wave
amplitude, and a progressive increase in the U-wave amplitude. Surawicz
found these changes to be invariably present when serum potassium levels
decreased to less than 2.3 mEq/L.337 Although U waves are not specific
for hypokalemia, they are sensitive indicators of the condition.
Replenishing the total-body potassium deficit for a depletion reflected
by a serum deficit of 1 mEq/L (e.g., from 3.3 to 4.3 mEq/L) may require
1000 mEq of potassium. Even if this amount could be given
instantaneously (and it should not
be replenished at a rate exceeding 250 mEq/day), it would take 24 to 48
hours to equilibrate in all tissues. Potassiumdepleted myocardium is
unusually sensitive to digoxin, calcium, and most important, potassium.
Rapid potassium infusion in a hypokalemic patient can produce
arrhythmias as severe as those produced by hypokalemia itself, again,
slow correction is preferred.343 Thus the decision to proceed with
surgery and anesthesia in the presence of acute or chronic depletions or
excesses of potassium depends on many factors.344-349 The cause and
treatment of the underlying condition creating the electrolyte imbalance
and the effect of that imbalance on perioperative risk and physiologic
processes must be known. The urgency of the operation, the degree of
electrolyte abnormality, the medications given, the acid-base balance,
and the suddenness or persistence of the electrolyte disturbance are all
considerations. For example, a small study of patients undergoing
vascular access procedures with preoperative potassium levels of higher
than 6 mmol/L demonstrated no adverse outcomes.347 Similarly, in a
cohort study in which 38 patients had a preoperative potassium level
higher than 5.5 mEq/L, no dysrhythmias or major morbidity were
associated with the use of succinylcholine.348 Retrospective
epidemiologic studies attribute significant risk to the administration
of potassium (even long-term oral administration).344 In one study, 1910
of 16,048 consecutive hospitalized patients were given oral potassium
supplements. Of these 1910 patients, hyperkalemia contributed to death
in 7, and the incidence of complications of potassium therapy was 1 in
250.350 Armed with such data, many internists do not prescribe oral
potassium therapy for patients given diuretic drugs, yet these patients
frequently become moderately hypokalemic.350 Modest hypokalemia occurs
in 10% to 50% of patients given diuretic drugs. Three studies
investigated whether modest hypokalemia was a problem by prospectively
seeking arrhythmias on the ECGs of patients who had various preoperative
levels of potassium.345,346,349 No difference in the incidence of
arrhythmias occurred in 25 normokalemic (K+ \>3.4 mEq/L) patients, 25
moderately hypokalemic (K+ = 3-3.4 mEq/L) patients, and 10 severely
hypokalemic (K+ \< 2.9 mEq/L) patients.345 Wahr and coauthors studied
2402 patients undergoing elective CABG and concluded that a serum
potassium level less than 3.5 mmol/L was a predictor of perioperative
arrhythmia (OR, 2.2; 95% CI, 1.2-4.0), intraoperative arrhythmia (OR,
2.0; 95% CI, 1.0-3.6), and postoperative atrial fibrillation/flutter
(OR, 1.7; 95% CI, 1.0-2.7).349 Modest hypokalemia can have severe
consequences.350,351 Holland and coworkers treated 21 patients with 50
mg of hydrochlorothiazide twice a day for 4 weeks.351 These patients had
a history of becoming hypokalemic during diuretic therapy; no patients
had cardiac disease or were taking other medications. Before and after
diuretic therapy, 24-hour ambulatory ECGs were recorded. This study is
also subject to the limitations of Holter monitoring. Ventricular
ectopy, including complex ventricular ectopy (multifocal PVCs,
ventricular couplets, ventricular tachycardia), developed in 7 of the 21
patients (33%). Potassium repletion decreased the number of ectopic
ventricular beats per patient from 71.2 to 5.4/h. Apparently, some
patients are sensitive to even minor potassium depletion. In the
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial involving 361,662 patients, more
than 2000 of whom were
treated for hypertension with diuretics, the reduction in serum
potassium after diuretic therapy was greater in patients with PVCs.350

Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
Preoperative Search for Diverse Associated Disorders in Gastrointestinal
Disease Although preoperative preparation of the GI tract is usually the
responsibility of the surgeon, GI disease can and often does cause
derangements in many or all other systems. Such disturbances can affect
the safety of anesthesia for the patient. Preoperative preparation
should include knowledge of disease processes and their effects to guide
the patient smoothly through the perioperative period. The major
advances of correcting fluid and electrolyte disorders and optimizing
nutritional status preoperatively allow surgical procedures to be
performed in patients with GI disease previously deemed to be at too
great a risk and may have lessened the risk for others.45-47,352
Nonetheless, in patients with GI disease, thorough assessment of
intravascular fluid volume, electrolyte concentrations, and nutrition is
essential, including an evaluation of the supervening side effects of
these therapies (e.g., hypophosphatemia from parenteral nutrition,
hyperkalemia or cardiac arrhythmias from too vigorous treatment of
hypokalemia, and volume overload from too rapid or too vigorous
treatment of hypovolemia). In addition to the vast alterations in
fluids, electrolytes, and nutrition that can occur with such diverse GI
diseases as neoplasms and pancreatitis, patients with GI disorders can
have gastroesophageal reflux disease,353 bowel obstruction, vomiting, or
hypersecretion of acid. These effects may merit rapid induction of
anesthesia with the application of cricoid pressure or endotracheal
intubation with the patient unanesthetized (awake), preoperative
nasogastric suctioning, or preoperative use of histamine receptor
blocking drugs. Clotting abnormalities may need to be corrected because
fat-soluble vitamin K (often malabsorbed) is necessary for the synthesis
of factors II, VII, IX, and X in the liver. Liver disease is often
associated with GI disease and, if severe enough, can also result in a
deficiency of clotting factors synthesized by the liver. Other factors
should be remembered in the perioperative management of any patient with
GI disease. First, closed spaces containing gas expand by absorbing
nitrous oxide, as such expansion can lead to ischemic injury, rupture of
GI viscera, or both. Second, GI surgery predisposes the patient to blood
stream contamination, which can lead to sepsis and decreased peripheral
vascular resistance, massive fluid requirements, cardiac failure, and
renal insufficiency. The surgical site infection rate has been
declining. This decrease may be attributable to the use of better
technique, more appropriate prophylactic timing and use of antibiotics,
better nutrition, less invasive (laparoscopic and endoscopic) surgery,
maintenance of normothermia, and surgical resection of even
tumors.354-358 Third, patients with GI disease may have many other
associated disorders not directly related to the GI tract. For example,
they may be anemic from deficiencies in iron, intrinsic factor, folate,
or vitamin B12.
They may also manifest neurologic changes from combined-system disease.
Respiration may be impaired because of tobacco abuse, peritonitis,
abscess, pulmonary obstruction, previous incisions, aspiration, or
pulmonary embolism (as occurs with ulcerative colitis or with
thrombophlebitis in bedridden patients). These patients may also have
hepatitis, cholangitis, side effects from antibiotic drugs or other
medications, massive bleeding with anemia and shock, or psychological
derangements. Because GI disease can be accompanied by so many diverse
associated disorders, the clinician must clearly search for involvement
of other systems and preoperatively assess and treat such disorders
appropriately. Discussion of two specific diseases, ulcerative colitis
and carcinoid tumor, highlights the importance of involvement of other
systems in GI disease.

Ulcerative Colitis and Carcinoid Tumors as Examples of Gastrointestinal
Disease Affecting Other Systems Ulcerative colitis is a chronic
inflammatory disease of the colonic mucosa, typically starting in the
rectum and extending proximally through the colon. It is often marked
with an unpredictable clinical course with periods of remission and
exacerbation. Patients with ulcerative colitis may also have the
following: phlebitis; deficiencies in iron, folate, or vitamin B12;
anemia; or clotting disorders caused by malabsorption. They can present
as malnourished or dehydrated, or with electrolyte abnormalities. In
addition, ulcerative colitis can be accompanied by massive bleeding,
bowel obstruction, bowel perforation, toxic megacolon, hepatitis,
arthritis, iritis, spondylitis, diabetes, or pancreatitis. The site of
origin of carcinoid tumors in more than 60% of patients is the GI
tract.358a Within the GI tract, carcinoid tumors have been documented to
occur from the esophagus to the rectum. Tumors arising in the ileocecal
region have the highest incidence of metastases. Carcinoid tumors
originating from sites other than the GI tract, such as the head and
neck, lung, gonads, thymus, breast, and urinary tract, have also been
reported. Cardiac involvement, although frequently reported, is usually
limited to right-sided valvular and myocardial plaque formation.359 Not
all patients with carcinoid tumors have symptoms attributable to
secretion of hormone by the tumor. Some do, however, and unexpected
carcinoid can manifest intraoperatively by hypersecretion of gastric
fluid. The most comprehensive series in the literature indicates that
only 7% of patients have carcinoid syndrome, which typically consists of
flushing, diarrhea, and valvular heart disease. Of those patients with
the syndrome, approximately 74% have cutaneous flushing, 68% have
intestinal hypermotility, 41% have cardiac symptoms, and 18% have
wheezing. Factors influencing symptoms include the location of the tumor
and the specific hormones produced and secreted. Although it is
generally believed that if patients do not exhibit carcinoid syndrome,
the tumors are not producing serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine \[5-HT\]),
such may not be the case. Approximately 50% of patients with carcinoid
tumors of the GI tract demonstrate evidence of 5-HT production as
manifested by elevated urinary levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(5-HIAA), a metabolic product of 5-HT. Carcinoid syndrome is usually
associated with ileal carcinoid tumors that have metastasized

to the liver. Presumably, the liver clears mediators released from the
tumor. Impairment of this clearing ability by the metastatic tumor
results in carcinoid syndrome. Most patients with carcinoid tumors and
increased urinary 5-HIAA levels have typical carcinoid tumors
originating from the midgut (ileum or jejunum). These patients excrete
only small amounts of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP). Patients with
atypical carcinoid tumors that originate in the foregut (bronchus,
stomach, and pancreas) excrete large amounts of 5-HT and 5-HTP, as well
as moderately higher amounts of 5-HIAA. Although it is generally agreed
that 5-HT is responsible for the diarrhea experienced by patients with
carcinoid tumors, other neurohumoral agents may contribute to the
flushing and hypotension, including dopamine, histamine, and some of the
neuropeptides such as substance P, neurotensin, vasoactive intestinal
peptide, and somatostatin. The net physiologic effect of circulating
5-HT represents a composite of both direct action (mediated by 5-HT
receptors) and indirect action (mediated through modulation of
adrenergic neurotransmission). The existence of several subtypes of 5-HT
receptors may account for the different effects of 5-HT on various
serotonin-sensitive tissue beds. Indirect actions are effected through
alterations in catecholamine release and depend on the level of
circulating 5-HT. 5-HT has little, if any, direct effect on the heart.
With increased levels, however, positive chronotropic and inotropic
myocardial effects may occur, mediated by the release of noradrenaline
(norepinephrine). Effects of serotonin on the vasculature include both
vasoconstriction and vasodilation. Alterations in GI function attributed
to 5-HT include increased motility and net intestinal secretion of
water, sodium chloride, and potassium. 5-HT reportedly causes
bronchoconstriction in many animals, but rarely in humans. Patients with
asthma are a possible exception. Carcinoid tumors frequently manifest as
diarrhea with fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Because these tumors
secrete vasoactive substances, patients can exhibit hypotension or
hypertension along with the flush associated with release of vasoactive
substances. Vasoactive substances can be released from the tumor by any
number of substances, including catecholamines. The anesthesiologist
needs to be ready and able to treat hypotension, decreased peripheral
vascular resistance, bronchospasm, and hypertension. This difficulty in
managing carcinoid syndrome seemed to change with the availability of a
somatostatin analogue, octreotide, and lanreotide. In fact, somatostatin
is such a powerful inhibitor of the release of peptides from carcinoid
tumors and an inhibitor of the peptic effects on receptor cells that it
is the therapy of choice for preoperative, intraoperative, and
postoperative management of carcinoid symptoms and crises.360,361 In
cardiac surgical patients, mortality has declined over time, and
vasopressors have been shown to be safe in conjunction with
octreotide.362 However, the ease of management of most
patients360,361,363-366 should not lull the anesthesiologist into being
unprepared---in fact, somatostatin has caused problems of its own and
has failed to prevent severe hypotension and bronchospasm.367,368 In
patients with severe hypotension that is not treatable with
somatostatin, the drug of choice is vasopressin; angiotensin has
demonstrated benefit but only recently become available in the United
States. However, the vasoactive
substances released by carcinoid tumors cause fibrosis of the heart
valves that often results in pulmonic stenosis or tricuspid
insufficiency. To increase cardiac output in a patient with tricuspid
insufficiency, the anesthesiologist should avoid drugs or situations
that increase pulmonary vascular resistance. In addition, the production
of large amounts of 5-HT (equal to 200 mg/day of 5-HIAA) can lead to the
development of niacin deficiency with pellagra (as occurs with diarrhea,
dermatitis, and dementia). Steroids have been effective in treating the
symptoms of bronchial carcinoid tumors. Although prophylactic
preoperative administration and intraoperative therapeutic use have been
described, controlled studies of beneficial effects are lacking.
Aprotinin, like steroids, inhibits the kallikrein cascade by blocking
the proteinase activity of kallikrein, and some reports have described a
dramatic clinical response, though it is not available in the United
States. A subset of patients with symptoms of carcinoid syndrome
excretes histamine at increased levels in their urine. Histamine causes
vasodilation of small blood vessels, which leads to flushing and
decreased total peripheral resistance. Histamine is known to cause
bronchoconstriction, particularly in patients with bronchial asthma and
other pulmonary diseases. Histamine receptor blocking drugs have been
used with some success in alleviating the flushing associated with
carcinoid syndrome. H2 antagonism alone was found to be just as
effective as combination therapy in preventing symptoms; pure H1
antagonism, however, was ineffective. These therapies have been
relegated to a secondline defense since the use of somatostatin.
Catecholamines aggravate the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome, presumably
by stimulating release of hormone by the tumor. Adrenergic receptors
have not been demonstrated in carcinoid tumors, nor do these tumors
usually have neural innervation. Perhaps adrenergic stimuli work through
their mechanical effects on the gut and vessels to stimulate the release
of tumor products. Treatment of patients with carcinoid tumors by means
of α- and β-adrenergic antagonists has been beneficial in ameliorating
flushing in some instances but ineffective in others. The results of
prospective studies on somatostatin to ameliorate the symptoms of
carcinoid syndrome have been dramatic. Somatostatin appears to have been
a major advance in the treatment of carcinoid syndrome, it is now the
mainstay of medical treatment perioperatively. Bronchospasm with or
without flushing also develops in many patients when vasoactive
substances are released. Thus a patient with a carcinoid tumor may be
well or may be severely incapacitated by pulmonary, neurologic,
nutritional, fluid, electrolytic, or cardiovascular disturbances.
Therefore, although the GI system in itself may not require extensive
preoperative preparation, GI disease can cause disturbances in any or
all other systems that require extensive preoperative preparation to
optimize the patient's condition in addition to preoperative knowledge
of physiology and the effects of diseases to guide patients through the
perioperative period smoothly. In addition, the anesthesiologist's
understanding of the nature of the surgical procedure aids in
determining the system involvement caused by the GI disorder. Another
perioperative consideration is that patients with GI diseases have had
to endure the psychosocial trauma of having to live with their disease
for long periods or the necessity of
facing such a prospect.369 They need emotional support, kindness, and
empathy as much as, if not more than, other patients without sacrificing
scientific rigor in the treatment of their condition. Obtaining relevant
psychological data while gathering medical information, sitting while
taking the history, and empathizing with the patient about how difficult
it must be to accomplish tasks with this disease legitimize the
physician's interests in and support of the patient's pain and other
psychosocial issues. The time spent sitting and talking with the patient
also allows the anesthesiologist to discuss options for pain therapy
with the patient, and other issues that show the anesthesiologist to be
both a competent physician and particularly concerned with that
patient's well-being.

LIVER DISEASE What are the risks of giving anesthesia to patients with
acute liver disease who require emergency surgery? What are the risks of
giving anesthesia to patients with chronic impairment of liver function?
What can be done to minimize these risks? Although one may think that
the experiences gained from providing anesthesia for liver
transplantation would answer many of these questions, a substantial
difference exists between optimizing cardiovascular function to meet the
needs of a new liver (e.g., supply of nutrients) and maintaining liver
function in a diseased liver. Hepatic physiology and pathology are
discussed in Chapter 16.

Hematologic Disorders and Oncologic Disease HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS Sickle
Cell Anemia and Related Hemoglobinopathies The sickle cell syndromes
constitute a family of hemoglobinopathies caused by abnormal genetic
transformation of amino acids in the heme portion of the hemoglobin
molecule. The sickle cell syndromes arise from a mutation in the
β-globin gene that changes the sixth amino acid from valine to glutamic
acid. A major pathologic feature of sickle cell disease is the
aggregation of irreversibly sickled cells in blood vessels. The
molecular basis of sickling is the aggregation of deoxygenated
hemoglobin B molecules along their longitudinal axis.370 This abnormal
aggregation distorts the cell membrane and thereby produces a sickle
shape. Irreversibly sickled cells become dehydrated and rigid and can
cause tissue infarcts by impeding blood flow and oxygen to
tissues.370-373 Several studies show enhanced adhesion of sickled
erythrocytes to vascular endothelium, as well.374 Some other abnormal
hemoglobins interact with hemoglobin S to various degrees and give rise
to symptomatic disease in patients heterozygous for hemoglobin S and one
of the other hemoglobins such as the hemoglobin of thalassemia
(hemoglobin C). Three tenths of 1% of the African American population in
the United States have sickle cell-thalassemia disease (hemoglobin SC);
these patients also have end-organ disease and symptoms suggestive of
organ infarction. For these patients, perioperative considerations
should be similar to those for patients with sickle cell disease
(hemoglobin SS).
Whereas 8% to 10% of African Americans have the sickle cell trait
(hemoglobin AS), 0.2% are homozygous for sickle cell hemoglobin and have
sickle cell anemia. Sickle cell trait is a heterozygous condition in
which the individual has one βS globin gene and one βA globin gene,
which results in the production of both hemoglobin S and hemoglobin A,
with a predominance of hemoglobin A. Sickle cell trait is not clinically
significant because hemoglobin AS cells begin to sickle only when the
oxygen saturation of hemoglobin is less than 20%. Minimal difference has
been found between physiologically normal persons (i.e., those with
hemoglobin AA) and those with hemoglobin AS regarding survival rates,
though there is one exception---patients with hemoglobin AS have a 50%
increase in pulmonary infarction. However, single case reports of a
perioperative death and a perioperative brain infarct in two patients
with hemoglobin AS disease do exist, as does a report of death believed
to be caused by aortocaval compression during general anesthesia that
resulted in a sickling crisis.375 Frequent measurement of oxygen
saturation (pulse oximetry) in multiple areas of the body is recommended
when caring these AS patients, including the ear and toe in pregnant
patients.375 The pathologic end-organ damage that occurs in sickle cell
states is attributable to three processes: the sickling or adhesion of
cells in blood vessels, which causes infarcts and subsequent tissue
destruction secondary to tissue ischemia; hemolytic crisis secondary to
hemolysis; and aplastic crises that occur with bone marrow exhaustion,
which can rapidly result in severe anemia. Patients currently in crisis
should not undergo surgery except for emergencies, and then only after
an exchange transfusion.372,374-378 Because sickling is increased with
lowered oxygen tensions, acidosis, hypothermia, and the presence of more
desaturated hemoglobin S; current therapy includes keeping the patient
warm and well hydrated, giving supplemental oxygen, maintaining high
cardiac output, and avoiding areas of stasis with pressure or
tourniquets. Meticulous attention to these practices in periods when we
do not usually pay most careful attention (i.e., waiting in the
preinduction area) or when gas exchange may be most unmatched to the
cardiovascular-metabolic demands (early postoperative period) may be
important in lessening morbidity. Following these measures routinely
succeeded in reducing mortality to 1% in several series of patients with
sickle cell syndromes.375,378,379 Retrospective review of patients'
charts led the authors of those studies to conclude that, at most, a
0.5% mortality rate could be attributed to the interaction between
sickle cell anemia and anesthesia. Several investigators have advocated
using partial exchange transfusions perioperatively. In children with
sickle cell anemia and acute lung syndromes, partial exchange
transfusion improved clinical symptoms and blood oxygenation. In
addition, serum bilirubin levels decreased in patients with acute liver
injury. Clinical improvement of pneumococcal meningitis and cessation of
hematuria in papillary necrosis also accompanied exchange
transfusion.371 The goal of transfusion therapy is to lower the
concentration of hemoglobin S to less than 30%, minimize splenic
sequestration, treat severe anemia, and avoid acute chest syndrome due
to low PaO2.379a Exchange transfusion serves to lower the concentration
of hemoglobin S, while red blood cell transfusions serve to correct
anemia. To date only regular transfusion therapy has been associated
with improved mortality in the extended period.379b,c Two studies

demonstrated a possible decrease in perioperative morbidity after
partial exchange transfusion when compared with the risks of exchange
transfusion.373,380 A retrospective review of 14 patients with sickle
cell anemia who were undergoing total hip revision supported the
decision to perform a simple transfusion preoperatively only if the
patient's hemoglobin is significantly lower than their steady-state
hemoglobin level.381 Transfusion can be used intraoperatively according
to hemoglobin level or blood loss volume. Other conditions are common in
sickle cell syndromes: pulmonary dysfunction with increased shunting,
renal insufficiency, gallstones, small MIs, priapism, stroke, aseptic
necrosis of bones and joints, ischemic ulcers, retinal detachment as a
result of neovascularization, and complications of repeated
transfusions. In thalassemia, globin structures are normal, but because
of gene deletion, the rate of synthesis of either the α or β chains of
hemoglobin (α- and β-thalassemia, respectively) decreases.382-384 Two
copies of the gene that codes for the α-globin chain are located on
chromosome 16. Deletion of all four of these genes causes cell death in
utero, and three deletions cause severe chronic hemolysis and a
shortened life span. α-Thalassemia-1 (trait) occurs when two genes have
been deleted and mild anemia results; α-thalassemia-2 (silent) occurs
when the two genes have been deleted but no mild anemia or microcytosis
results. In α-thalassemia trait, the hemoglobin A2 level is normal.
β-Thalassemia is associated with an excess of α chains, which denature
developing erythrocytes, thereby leading to their premature death in
marrow or to shortened survival in the circulation. An elevated
hemoglobin A2 level is the hallmark of β-thalassemia trait, a common
cause of mild anemia and microcytosis. These syndromes are common in
Southeast Asia, India, and the Middle East and in people of African
descent. In thalassemia, facial deformity from erythropoietinstimulated
ineffective erythropoiesis (ineffective because of a genetic inability
to produce useful hemoglobin) was reported to make endotracheal
intubation difficult.382,383 The anemia associated with these syndromes
often produces compensatory hyperplasia of the erythroid marrow, which
in turn is associated with severe skeletal abnormalities.382-384

Cytoskeletal Anemias (Hereditary Spherocytosis and Elliptocytosis),
Enzyme-Deficient Anemias, and Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias Congenital
abnormalities of the erythrocyte membrane are becoming better
understood. In elliptocytosis and hereditary spherocytosis, the membrane
is more permeable to cations and is more susceptible to lipid loss when
cell energy is depleted than is the membrane of a normal red blood cell.
Both hereditary spherocytosis (present in 1 in 5000 people) and
hereditary elliptocytosis are inherited as autosomal dominant traits. In
both disorders, defects in the membrane are thought to result from a
mutation of spectrin, a structural protein of the membrane
cytoskeleton.385 Although the therapeutic role of splenectomy in these
diseases is not fully defined, in severe disease, splenectomy is known
to improve the shortened life span of the red blood cell from 20-30 days
to 40-70 days. Because splenectomy predisposes the patient to
gram-positive septicemia (particularly pneumococcal), perhaps patients
should be given pneumococcal vaccine preoperatively. No specific
problems related to anesthesia have been reported for these disorders.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (a gender-linked
recessive trait) has been recognized as the most common enzymopathy
worldwide, most often expressed in males, and in patients of African,
Asian, Mediterranean, or Middle Eastern descent.385a Young cells have
normal activity, but older cells are grossly deficient when compared
with normal cells. A deficiency in G6PD results in hemolysis of the
erythrocyte and the formation of Heinz bodies. Red blood cell hemolysis
can also occur with intercurrent infections or after the administration
of drugs that produce substances requiring G6PD for detoxification
(e.g., methemoglobin, glutathione, and hydrogen peroxide). Drugs to be
avoided are sulfa drugs, quinidine, prilocaine, lidocaine, antimalarial
drugs, antipyretic drugs, nonnarcotic analgesics, vitamin K analogues,
and perhaps sodium nitroprusside. The autoimmune hemolytic anemias
include cold antibody anemia, warm antibody anemia (idiopathic), and
druginduced anemia and occur from antibody mediate destruction of red
blood cells.386-388 Cold antibody hemolytic anemia is mediated by IgM or
IgG antibodies, which at room temperature and lower temperatures cause
red blood cells to clump. When these patients are given blood
transfusions, the cells and all fluid infusions must be warm, and body
temperature must be meticulously maintained at 37°C if hemolysis is to
be prevented. Warm antibody (or idiopathic) hemolytic anemia is mediated
by IgG and is a difficult management problem characterized by chronic
anemia, the presence of antibodies active against red blood cells, a
positive Coombs test, and difficulty crossmatching blood. For patients
undergoing elective surgery, autologous transfusions, predeposit of
blood with or without erythropoietin stimulation,389 and blood from rare
Rh-negative red blood cell donors or the patient's first-degree
relatives (or both) can be used. In emergency situations, the
possibility of autotransfusion, splenectomy, corticosteroid treatment,
rituximab, cyclophosphamide, or azathioprine should be discussed with a
hematologist knowledgeable in this area.389a Drug-induced anemias have
three mechanisms. In receptortype hemolysis, a drug (e.g., penicillin)
binds to the membrane of the red blood cell, and the complex stimulates
the formation of an antibody against the complex. In "innocent
bystander" hemolysis, a drug (e.g., quinidine, sulfonamide) binds to a
plasma protein, thereby stimulating an antibody (IgM) that cross-reacts
with an erythrocyte. In autoimmune hemolysis, the drug stimulates the
production of an antibody (IgG) that cross-reacts with the erythrocyte.
Drug-induced hemolytic anemias generally cease when therapy with the
drug ends.

Granulocytopenia Granulocyte mechanisms have undergone experimental
elaboration since 2000, partly because of the molecular biologic
revolution: in addition to erythropoietin, more than 14
hemolymphopoietic growth factors or cytokines have been characterized
biochemically and cloned genetically. These growth factors interact with
cell-surface receptors to produce their major actions (Table 32.14).390
Use of the colony-stimulating factors has permitted more intense
oncologic treatment. The few reports related to their perioperative
effects detail the unfavorable adverse consequences that such therapies
can have on gas exchange when adverse immunologic effects occur.391 In
patients who have fewer than 500 granulocytes/mL of blood and
established sepsis, the use of growth factor and granulocyte transfusion
has been shown to prolong
life.392-394 Although bone marrow transplantation is being used
increasingly, complications usually occur after transplantation, not on
harvesting of cells. Abnormal results on pulmonary function testing
before bone marrow transplantation seem to predict complications after
transplantation, but not so strongly as to preclude transplantation.395

Platelet Disorders Although inherited platelet disorders are rare,
acquired disorders are quite common and affect at least 20% of all
patients in medical and surgical ICUs, with infections and drug
therapies being the leading causes.396 Both acquired and inherited
platelet conditions cause skin and mucosal bleeding, whereas defects in
plasma coagulation produce deep tissue bleeding or delayed bleeding.
Perioperative treatment of inherited platelet disorders (e.g., Glanzmann
thrombasthenia, Bernard-Soulier syndrome, HermanskyPudlak syndrome)
consists of platelet transfusions. EACA has been used successfully to
decrease perioperative bleeding in thrombocytopenic patients. The much
more common acquired disorders may respond to one of several therapies.
Immune thrombocytopenias, such as those associated with lupus
erythematosus, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, uremia,
hemolytic-uremic syndrome, platelet transfusions, heparin, and
thrombocytosis, may respond to steroids, splenectomy, plateletpheresis,
eradication of Helicobacter pylori, or alkylating agents, or may require
platelet transfusions, plasma exchange, whole blood exchange, or
transfusion; sometimes these disorders do not respond to
anything.179,397,398 Traditionally, splenectomy is performed when
steroid therapy fails or reaches a dosage that poses unacceptable risks
of toxicity. Immunoglobulin infusions and rituximab may induce desirable
remissions in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura without splenectomy.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is a rare immunemediated thrombotic
microangiopathic disorder caused by antibodies to ADAMTS 13 (A
Disintegrin AND Metalloproteinase with a Thrombospondin type 1 motif,
member 13) that, despite various therapies, still carries a high
mortality rate.398a The current therapies of plasma exchange,
corticosteroids, and rituximab have improved survival rates, though new
therapies are under investigation.398b One uncontrolled study implies
that the benefit lies not only in improvement of the hematologic picture
but also in prevention of ARDS, a leading cause of death in these
patients.398 In that study, early institution of plasmapheresis improved
oxygenation. By far the largest number of platelet abnormalities
consists of drug-related defects in the aggregation and release of
platelets. Aspirin irreversibly acetylates platelet cyclooxygenase, the
enzyme that converts arachidonic acid to prostaglandin endoperoxidases.
Because cyclooxygenase is not regenerated in the circulation within the
life span of the platelet and because this enzyme is essential for the
aggregation of platelets, one aspirin tablet may affect platelet
function for a week. All other drugs that inhibit platelet function
(e.g., vitamin E, indomethacin, sulfinpyrazone, dipyridamole, tricyclic
antidepressant drugs, phenothiazines, furosemide, steroids) do not
inhibit cyclooxygenase function irreversibly; these drugs disturb
platelet function for only 24 to 48 hours. If emergency surgery is
needed before the customary 8-day period for platelet regeneration after
aspirin therapy or if the 2-day period for other drugs has not elapsed,
administration of 2 to 5 units of platelet concentrate will return
platelet function
TABLE 32.14 Major Effects of Hemolymphopoietic Growth Factors and
Cytokines Cytokine

Other Names

Erythropoietin

Biologic Effects Erythrocyte production

Interleukin-3 (IL-3)

Multicolony-stimulating factor Stem cell--activating factor Persisting
cell-stimulating factor Hemopoietin-2

Stimulates proliferation and differentiation of granulocyte, macrophage,
eosinophil, mast cell, megakaryocyte, and T- and B-cell lineage and
early myeloid stem cells Interacts with erythropoietin to stimulate
erythroid colony formation, stimulates proliferation of AML blasts, and
stimulates histamine release by mast cells

Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-CSF)

Differentiation factor MGI-2

Stimulates granulocyte lineage proliferation and differentiation Acts on
early myeloid stem cells, especially in association with other factors;
synergizes with IL-3 to stimulate megakaryocyte colony formation
Increases neutrophil phagocytes and antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity Releases neutrophils from bone marrow and is chemotactic
for neutrophils and monocytes Enhances phagocytosis and
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and oxidative metabolism
of neutrophils Stimulates monocyte killing of Mycobacterium
avium-intracellulare and Candida species, tumoricidal activity of
monocytes, antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and expression
of cell-surface proteins

Granulocyte-­ macrophage colony-­stimulating ­factor (GM-CSF)

Stimulates granulocyte, macrophage, and megakaryocyte proliferation and
­differentiation, early myeloid stem cells, and---in the presence of
erythropoietin---­ erythropoiesis Enhances the cytotoxic and phagocytic
colony-stimulating factor activity of neutrophils against bacteria,
yeast, parasites, and antibody-coated tumor cells Increases surface
expression of neutrophil adhesion proteins and enhances eosinophil
cytotoxicity, macrophage phagocytosis, and basophil histamine release
Amplifies IL-2--stimulated T-cell proliferation and stimulates B-cell
lines to proliferate

Colony-stimulating factor-1

Macrophage colony-stimulating factor

Stimulates predominantly macrophage-monocyte proliferation and
differentiation with lesser effects on granulocytes Acts synergistically
with other factors on earlier myeloid stem cells Stimulates macrophage
phagocytosis, killing, migration, antitumor activity, and metabolism
Stimulates secretion of plasminogen activator, G-CSF, interferon, IL-3,
or tumor necrosis factor by peritoneal macrophages

Interleukin-1 (α and β)

Endogenous pyrogen Hemopoietin-1 Osteoclast-activating factor
Lymphocyte-activating factor

Induces synthesis of acute-phase proteins by hepatocytes Activates
resting T cells, cofactor for T- and B-cell proliferation Chemotactic
for monocytes and neutrophils Induces production of growth factors,
including G-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-6, CSF-1, IL-3, and interferon by many cells
Radioprotective in mice

Interleukin-2

T-cell growth factor

Growth factor for T cells, activates cytotoxic T lymphocytes, promotes
synthesis of other cytokines, enhances natural killer cell function

Interleukin-4

B-cell--stimulating factor-1 (BSF-1) B-cell differentiation factor
(BCDF) IgG induction factor

Enhances antibody production (IgG and IgE) and up-regulates class II MHC
molecules and Fc receptors on B cells Costimulant with anti-IgM
antibodies for induction of DNA synthesis in resting B cells Stimulates
growth of activated T cells In the presence of IL-3, enhances mast cell
growth; with G-CSF, enhances granulocytes of GM colony formation; and
with erythropoietin and/or IL-1, stimulates erythroid and megakaryocyte
colony formation

Interleukin-5

Eosinophil differentiation factor (EDF) Enhances antibody production
(IgA) T-cell--replacing factor (TRF) Promotes proliferation and IgG
secretion by B-cell lines and induces hapten-specific B-cell growth
factor-II (BCGF-II) IgG secretion in vitro by in vivo--primed B cells
B-cell differentiation factor (BCDF) Promotes differentiation by normal
B cells Stimulates eosinophil production and differentiation (GM-CSF and
IL-3 act synergistically with IL-5 to stimulate eosinophil proliferation
and differentiation) Enhances synthesis of IL-2 receptors

Interleukin-6

B-cell--stimulating factor-2 (BSF-2) Interferon-β2 T-cell activation
factor Hybridoma growth factor

B-cell differentiation and IgG secretion T cells activated to
cytotoxicity Synergizes with IL-3 on early marrow myeloid stem cells and
stimulates proliferation and differentiation of granulocytes,
macrophages, eosinophils, mast cells, and megakaryocytes, as well as
platelet production (may be a thrombopoietin)

Interleukin-7

Lymphopoietin-1

Stimulates pre--B-cell production Stimulates T-cell proliferation

Interleukin-8\*

Neutrophil-activating factor T-cell chemotactic factor

Inflammatory mediator; stimulates activation of neutrophils

Interleukin-9

Stimulates erythroid colony formation and proliferation of a
megakaryocyte cell line
TABLE 32.14 Major Effects of Hemolymphopoietic Growth Factors and
Cytokines---cont'd Cytokine

Other Names

Biologic Effects

Interleukin-10

Cytokine synthesis--inhibiting factor

Inhibits cytokine production by TH1 cells

Interleukin-11 C-kit ligand

Stimulates B-cell, megakaryocyte, and mast cell lineages Mast cell
factor Stem cell factor Hemolymphopoietic growth factor-1

Acts on relatively early stem cells synergistically with other cytokines
Stimulates pre-B cells

\*Not considered a true growth factor but included here for
completeness. AML, Acute myeloblastic leukemia; IgA, immunoglobulin A;
IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; TH1, first of the thymus-derived cells.

in a 70-kg adult to an adequate level and platelet-induced clotting
dysfunction to normal. Only 30,000 to 50,000 normally functioning
platelets per milliliter are needed for normal clotting. One platelet
transfusion will increase the platelet count from 5,000 to 20,000/mL
blood; the platelet half-life is approximately 8 hours. Heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia can develop within hours on reexposure to heparin in a
previously sensitized patient; prevalence has been shown to be
increasing, particularly in ICU populations.398c The diagnosis starts
with a clinical assessment, most commonly the 4-T score
(Thrombocytopenia, Timing of fall, presence of Thrombosis, and other
causes for Thrombocytopenia), with enzymatic immunoassays for
confirmation.398d Treatment can be initiated prior to confirmatory test
results, if suspicion is high. Argatroban is a direct thrombin inhibitor
effective as therapy for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.399 Major risk
factors for thrombosis include factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210A
mutations, elevated plasma homocysteine, and the antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome.400,401 Clinicians facing these challenging patients
may seek expert local consultation for help with management. This issue
is discussed more fully in Chapter 50.

Hemophilia and Related Clotting Disorders Abnormalities in blood
coagulation as a result of defects in plasma coagulation factors are
either inherited or acquired. Inherited disorders include X-linked
hemophilia A (a defect in factor VIII activity), von Willebrand disease
(defect in the von Willebrand component of factor VIII), hemophilia B (a
sex-linked deficiency of factor IX activity), and other less common
disorders. The sex-linked origin of some of these disorders means that
hemophilia occurs almost exclusively in the male children of female
carriers; men do not transmit the disease to their male children. In
elective surgery, levels of the deficient coagulation factor should be
assayed 48 hours preoperatively and the level restored to 40% of normal
before the surgical procedure. One unit of factor concentrate per
kilogram of body weight normally increases the factor concentration by
2%. Thus, in an individual essentially devoid of activity,
administration of 20 units/kg body weight would be required as an
initial dose. Because the half-life is 6 to 10 hours for factor VIII and
8 to 16 hours for factor IX, approximately 1.5 units/h/ kg of factor
VIII or 1.5 units/2 hours/kg of factor IX should be given. Additional
administration of factors VIII and IX should be guided by the activity
of the clotting factors for approximately 6 to 10 days
postoperatively.402-404 An antibody that inactivates factor VIII or IX
(fresh frozen plasma fails to increase clotting factor activity after
incubation

with the patient's plasma) develops in approximately 10% of patients
with either hemophilia A or B. These acquired anticoagulants are usually
composed of IgG, are poorly removed by plasmapheresis, and are variably
responsive to immunosuppressive drugs. The use of prothrombin complex
concentrates can be lifesaving to bypass the inhibitor. Patients who
come to the operating room after having received many units of blood (as
in massive GI bleeding and trauma) may have deficient clotting caused by
depletion of platelets and later coagulation factors, which occurs after
administration of approximately 10 units of blood. Treatment of these
deficiencies can be corrected with platelet concentrates and fresh
frozen plasma. In settings of massive hemorrhage requiring large volume
transfusion, the approximation of whole blood through a one to one to
one ratio of packed red blood cells to plasma to platelets can be
advantageous. Urokinase, streptokinase, and tissue-type plasminogen
activator (t-PA) have been used to treat pulmonary embolism, deep vein
thrombosis, stroke, and arterial occlusive disease. These drugs
accelerate the lysis of thrombi and emboli, in contrast to heparin,
which may prevent and slow propagation, but will not dissolve a
thrombus. Bleeding complications associated with these fibrinolytic
agents are the result of dissolution of hemostatic plugs and can be
quickly reversed by discontinuing the medication and replenishing plasma
fibrinogen with cryoprecipitate or plasma. However, cryoprecipitate and
plasma are seldom needed preoperatively because the fibrinolytic
activity of urokinase and streptokinase usually dissipates within 1 hour
of discontinuing their administration. Nonetheless, insufficient data
have accumulated to prescribe the ideal preoperative preparation and
intraoperative management of hemostasis in patients recently treated
with urokinase, streptokinase, or t-PA. Postponing surgery for three
half-lives of the drug (increases in plasmin activity in blood can be
assayed for ≥4 to 8 hours) may not be possible, and meticulous
observation of the operative field for hemostasis may not
suffice.405,406 The process may be even more complex in a patient with a
vascular or cardiac condition who requires heparin administration
intraoperatively. To correct the fibrinogen deficiency in these
patients, some clinicians administer fibrinogen as cryoprecipitate
preoperatively, and EACA at heparin administration. DDAVP has been used
in operations associated with high blood loss as a routine measure to
decrease bleeding and transfusion requirements. DDAVP therapy began as
treatment of platelet dysfunction in von Willebrand disease but has
since expanded to routine use in patients undergoing cardiovascular
surgery and to frequent use in other high-blood loss operations. A
meta-analysis of cardiac surgery concluded that DDAVP was not associated
with a clinically significant reduction in exposure to blood transfusion
in unselected patients,
and therefore the authors were unable to recommend the routine use of
DDAVP in patients exposed to CPB.407 However, DDAVP may reduce
postoperative bleeding in patients who have received preoperative
aspirin within 7 days of surgery, patients with CPB times in excess of
140 minutes, and patients with demonstrable platelet dysfunction. The
authors suggested that DDAVP could be used selectively in these
subgroups.

bone marrow depression as their primary toxic effect. Anthracycline
antibiotics (doxorubicin, daunorubicin, mithramycin, mitomycin C,
bleomycin) can all cause pulmonary infiltrates, cardiomyopathy
(especially doxorubicin and daunorubicin), myelotoxicity, and GI,
hepatic, and renal disturbances. Knowing these expected side effects and
complications allow general anesthesia to be safely provided to this
patient population with the appropriate preoperative plan.

ONCOLOGIC DISEASE Patients with malignant tumors may be otherwise
healthy or may be chronically ill with nutritional, neurologic,
metabolic, endocrinologic, electrolyte, cardiac, pulmonary, renal,
hepatic, hematologic, or pharmacologic disabilities. Thus determining
the other morbidities accompanying malignant tumors requires through
evaluation of all systems. Abnormalities frequently accompanying such
tumors include hypercalcemia either by direct bone invasion or by
ectopic elaboration of PTH or other bone-dissolving substance, uric acid
nephropathy, hyponatremia (especially with small cell, or oat cell,
carcinoma of the lung), nausea, vomiting, anorexia and cachexia, fever,
tumor-induced hypoglycemia, intracranial metastases (10%-20% of all
cancers), peripheral nerve or spinal cord disorders, meningeal
carcinomatosis, toxic neuropathies secondary to anticancer therapy, and
paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes (dermatomyositis, Eaton-­ Lambert
syndrome, myopathies, and distal neuropathies). Many patients with
malignant tumors are given large doses of analgesics and should be kept
comfortable during the perioperative period, it is of particular
importance in terminally ill patients.408 Immunomodulators, stimulating
factors or cytokines, gene identification,409,410 and drugs for treating
side effects (e.g., midazolam, ondansetron, and even marijuana) have
given new hope for safer, more effective therapy with fewer limiting
side effects. The effect of ondansetron in preventing vomiting and the
effect of midazolam in preventing memory-stimulated vomiting have been
important additions. The neurokinin-1 antagonists have also been
approved for treatment in oncologic patients. The toxicity of cancer
chemotherapy is related to the drugs used and the dose. For radiation
therapy, damage occurs when the following doses are exceeded: lungs,
1500 rad; kidneys, 2400 rad; heart, 3000 rad; spinal cord, 4000 rad;
intestine, 5500 rad; brain, 6000 rad; and bone, 7500 rad. The toxicities
of biologic and immunomodulating therapies are related to the change in
immune function that they cause. Alkylating agents cause bone marrow
depression, including thrombocytopenia, as well as alopecia, hemorrhagic
cystitis, nausea, and vomiting. The alkylating agents, including
cyclophosphamide and mechlorethamine, can act as an anticholinesterase
and prolong neuromuscular blockade.411 The antineoplastic alkaloid
vincristine produces peripheral neuropathy and SIADH, and vinblastine
produces myelotoxicity. Cisplatin is also associated with peripheral
neuropathy and severe nausea. Nitrosoureas can produce severe hepatic
and renal damage, as well as bone marrow toxicity, myalgia, and
paresthesia. Folic acid analogues such as methotrexate have been linked
to bone marrow depression, ulcerative stomatitis, pulmonary interstitial
infiltrates, GI toxicity, and occasionally, severe liver dysfunction.
Fluorouracil and floxuridine, both pyrimidine analogues, cause bone
marrow toxicity, megaloblastic anemia, nervous system dysfunction, and
hepatic and GI alterations. Purine analogues (mercaptopurine,
thioguanine) have

Patients Given Drug Therapy for Chronic and Acute Medical Conditions A
steadily increasing number of potent drugs are being used to treat
disease, and the average hospitalized patient receives more than 10
drugs. Many drugs have side effects that may make anesthesia challenging
and patient management more difficult. Knowing the pharmacologic
properties and potential side effects of commonly used drugs helps the
anesthesiologist avoid pitfalls during anesthesia and surgery.

ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS ACE inhibitors (e.g., captopril, enalapril, and
lisinopril) and angiotensin II receptor blockers (e.g., valsartan,
candesartan) are being used increasingly as first-line drugs and appear
to improve the quality of life of patients taking antihypertensive
drugs. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers may be
associated with more peripheral vasodilation and hypotension on
induction of anesthesia than are sympatholytic agents. Both ACE
inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blocking agents are associated
with such severe hypotension with standard anesthetic induction that we
discontinue or at least consider discontinuing the use of these drugs
preoperatively (see earlier). Catecholamine or sympathetic receptor
blocking drugs affect the three major types of catecholamine receptors:
α-adrenergic, β-adrenergic, and dopaminergic. The existence of
subdivisions (e.g., β1 and β2) suggested the possibility that some drugs
would be found to affect only one set of receptors. For example,
terbutaline is used more frequently than isoproterenol because
terbutaline is said to exert a preferential effect on β-2 receptors
(i.e., dilation of bronchial smooth muscle), thereby avoiding the
cardiac stimulation produced by drugs that stimulate β1-receptors. In
fact, the selectivity is dose related. At a certain dose, a direct
β2-receptor stimulating drug affects only those receptors but, at a
higher dose, stimulates both β1 and β2 receptors. The effect of a given
dose varies with each patient. A certain dose may stimulate β1 and β2
receptors in one patient but neither receptor in another patient. More
and more selective blocking drugs are being developed in the hope of
widening the margin among β1-, β2-, and α-adrenergic effects.
Ultimately, however, even more selectivity is desired. It would be
advantageous to be able to decrease the heart rate without changing
myocardial contractility or to increase contractility without changing
the heart rate. Metoprolol, atenolol, propranolol, betaxolol, timolol,
esmolol, pindolol, oxprenolol, acebutolol, carteolol, penbutolol, and
nadolol are widely available β-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs used
for therapy in the United States. Because nadolol has poor lipid
solubility, it has a long elimination half-life

32 • Anesthetic Implications of Concurrent Diseases

(17-24 hours) and does not cross the blood-brain barrier readily.
Although selective β-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs should be more
appropriate in patients with increased airway resistance or diabetes,
this advantage is apparent only when low doses are used. The use of
β-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs has become widespread because these
drugs treat everything from angina and hypertension to priapism and
stage fright. These drugs appear to decrease morbidity and mortality in
patients who have initially survived MI, and they may increase
perioperative survival in selected patients.412,413 When administration
of β-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs is terminated, sympathetic
stimulation often increases, as though the body had responded to the
presence of these drugs by increasing sympathetic neuron activity. Thus
propranolol and nadolol withdrawal can be accompanied by a
hyper--β-adrenergic condition that increases myocardial oxygen demands.
Administering propranolol or metoprolol can cause bradycardia,
exacerbations of decompensated heart failure, fatigue, dizziness,
depression, psychoses, bronchospasm, and Peyronie disease. The POISE
study emphasized the concerns that inadequate titration of these agents
can lead to stroke or increased mortality.111 Side effects of
dopaminergic receptor blocking drugs are discussed later. Prazosin,
terazosin, and oxazocine are α1-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs used
to treat hypertension, ischemic cardiomyopathy, receding hairlines, and
benign prostatic hypertrophy because they dilate both veins and arteries
and reduce sphincter tone. These drugs are associated with vertigo,
palpitations, depression, dizziness, weakness, and anticholinergic
effects. Some sympathomimetic drugs stimulate α-adrenergic receptors in
the brainstem. Clonidine, a drug with a half-life of 12 to 24 hours,
dexmedetomidine, and guanfacine are α2adrenergic receptor stimulants.
Presumably, α2-adrenergic agonists, including clonidine,
dexmedetomidine, and guanfacine, lower arterial blood pressure on a
long-term basis through the central brainstem adrenergic stimulation
referred to previously. They may also be used on a long-term basis to
treat opiate, cocaine, food, and tobacco withdrawal. Occasionally,
withdrawal from clonidine can precipitate a sudden rebound hypertensive
crisis. Tricyclic antidepressant drugs and presumably phenothiazines and
the butyrophenones interfere with the action of clonidine. Although
administration of a butyrophenone (e.g., droperidol) to a patient taking
clonidine, dexmedetomidine, or guanfacine on a long-term basis could
theoretically precipitate a hypertensive crisis, this has not been
reported. Clonidine administration can be accompanied by drowsiness, dry
mouth, orthostatic hypotension, bradycardia, and impotence. Acute
clonidine or dexmedetomidine administration decreases anesthetic
requirements by at least 40% to 60%; long-term administration decreases
requirements by 10% to 20%.414,415 Because of the relative safety of
these drugs and their ability to decrease anesthetic requirements, block
narcotic-induced muscle rigidity, and provide pain relief, their
popularity preoperatively, intraoperatively, and in ICU sedation is
increasing dramatically.414-418 Three other classes of antihypertensive
drugs affect the sympathetic nervous system indirectly: diuretics,
arteriolar dilators, and calcium channel blocking agents. Thiazide
diuretic drugs are associated with hypochloremic alkalosis, hypokalemia,
hyperglycemia, hyperuricemia, and hypercalcemia. The potassium-sparing
diuretic drug spironolactone is associated with hyperkalemia,
hyponatremia,
gynecomastia, and impotence. All diuretic drugs can cause dehydration.
The thiazide diuretics and furosemide appear to prolong neuromuscular
blockade. The arteriolar dilator hydralazine can cause a lupus-like
condition (usually with renal involvement), nasal congestion, headache,
dizziness, CHF, angina, and GI disturbances. Such a syndrome is
nonexistent with the other direct vasodilator on the U.S. market,
minoxidil. The calcium channel blocking drugs (slow-channel calcium ion
antagonists) inhibit the transmembrane influx of calcium ions into
cardiac and vascular smooth muscle. Such inhibition reduces the heart
rate (negative chronotropy), depresses contractility (negative
inotropy), decreases conduction velocity (negative dromotropy), and
dilates coronary, cerebral, and systemic arterioles (Fig. 32.7).419
Verapamil, diltiazem, and nifedipine all produce such effects, but to
varying degrees and apparently by similar, but different mechanisms.
These mechanisms relate to the three different classes of calcium
channel antagonists that they represent: the phenylalkyl amines, the
benzothiazepines, and the dihydropyridines, respectively. Nifedipine is
the most potent of the three as a smooth muscle dilator, whereas
verapamil and diltiazem have negative dromotropic and inotropic effects,
and weak vasodilating properties. Diltiazem has weak vasodilating
properties when compared with nifedipine and has less of an AV
conduction effect than does verapamil. Thus verapamil and diltiazem can
increase the PR interval and produce AV block. In fact, reflex
activation of the sympathetic nervous system may be necessary during the
administration of diltiazem, and especially during verapamil therapy, to
maintain normal conduction. Clearly, verapamil and diltiazem must be
titrated very carefully when a patient is already taking a β-adrenergic
receptor blocking drug or when adding β-blocking drugs to a patient
already taking verapamil or diltiazem. The use of calcium channel
blocking drugs has several important implications for anesthetic
management.419-421 First, the effects of inhaled and narcotic
anesthetics and nifedipine in decreasing systemic vascular resistance,
arterial blood pressure, and contractility may be additive. Similarly,
verapamil and anesthetics (inhaled anesthetics, nitrous oxide, and
narcotics) increase AV conduction times and additively decrease arterial
blood pressure, systemic vascular resistance, and contractility. Second,
verapamil and presumably the other calcium channel blocking drugs have
been found to decrease anesthetic requirements by up to 25%. These drugs
can produce neuromuscular blockade, and potentiate both depolarizing and
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs. Finally, because
slow-channel activation of calcium is necessary to cause spasms of
cerebral and coronary vessels, bronchoconstriction, and normal platelet
aggregation, these drugs may have a role in treating cerebral vasospasm
(nimodipine), coronary artery graft vasospasm (nicardipine),
bronchoconstriction, and unwanted clotting disorders perioperatively.
These drugs are highly protein bound and may displace or be displaced by
other drugs that are also highly protein bound (e.g., lidocaine,
bupivacaine, diazepam, disopyramide, and propranolol). Adverse
consequences can be minimized by titrating the inhaled or narcotic drug
to the hemodynamic and anesthetic effects. Hemodynamic, but not
electrophysiologic, changes can usually be reversed by administering
calcium. Reversal of the electrophysiologic effects may occur if high
doses of β-adrenergic agonists are given.

Ca 2+ 1

Ca2+

SV

Ca 2+ Ca 2+ SV

Ca 2+

Ca 2+

PM

Ca 2+

Ca2+ SR Ca 2+

Ca 2+ SR Ca 2+

Cellular Ca2+ stores

Cellular Ca2+ stores

3

Ca 2+

ATP

2

4 ATP--ase Contractile energy

Pi ADP Myosin Actin

Fig. 32.7 Schematic drawing of a smooth muscle cell showing calcium
(Ca2+) flux and possible sites of interference by halothane and
nifedipine. The concentration of calcium in the cytoplasm increases
(green arrows) because of entry through the plasma membrane (PM) and
release from surface vesicles (SV) or the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR).
When the concentration of cytoplasmic Ca2+ is sufficiently high,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is activated. Splitting of ATP by adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) into phosphatidylinositol (Pi) and adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) provides the interaction and contraction of actin
filaments and myosin particles constituting muscle fibers. The
concentration of cytoplasmic Ca2+ decreases (white arrows) with the
return of Ca2+ to cellular stores and the extracellular transport of
Ca2+. Both halothane and nifedipine probably (1) inhibit the entry of
Ca2+ and (2) may also interfere with cytoplasmic Ca2+ flux by reducing
the release of Ca2+ by the SR, by (3) reducing storage and reuptake, or
by (4) blocking ATPase or the contractile mechanism (or both). (Redrawn
from Tosone SR, Reves JG, Kissin I, et al. Hemodynamic responses to
nifedipine in dogs anesthetized with halothane. Anesth Analg.
1983;62:903--908.)

MOOD-ALTERING DRUGS Mood-altering drugs are the most frequently
prescribed medications in the United States.422,423 They include MAOIs,
SSRIs, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressant drugs, other
antidepressants that do not fall into previous drug category
classifications such as bupropion, and drugs of abuse such as cocaine.
MAOIs, which include isocarboxazid, phenelzine, pargyline,
tranylcypromine, and deprenyl, bind irreversibly to the enzyme MAO,
thereby increasing intraneuronal levels of amine neurotransmitters
(serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine, epinephrine). This increase is
associated with an antidepressant effect, an antihypertensive effect, an
antinarcoleptic effect, elevation of liver enzymes, and delayed onset of
Parkinson disease. Because two forms of the enzyme (MAO-A and MAO-B) are
selective in vitro for substrate (MAO-A is selective for serotonin,
dopamine, and norepinephrine; MAO-B for tyramine and phenylethylamine),
presumably MAOIs selective for MAO-A or MAO-B would have different
effects.424 Interactions between MAOIs and a variety of foods and drugs
containing indirect-acting sympathomimetic substances such as ephedrine
or tyramine (found in aged hard cheeses) can occur for as long as 2
weeks after the last dose of MAOI is given. The most serious effects of
this interaction are convulsions and hyperpyrexic coma (particularly
after narcotics). Anesthetic management of a patient given an MAOI can
be challenging; for this reason it is widely accepted practice to
discontinue MAOIs at least 2 to 3 weeks before any planned operation,
further MAOIs are seen quite infrequently.422-428 Severe reactions have
occurred when too short an interval existed between the administration
of MAOIs and tricyclic antidepressants. Emergency surgery in patients
given MAOIs can be punctuated by hemodynamic instability. A regional
block can be attempted as treatment of postoperative pain to avoid
having to give narcotics. Cases of hyperpyrexic coma

after the administration of most narcotics have been reported in humans,
and animal studies document a 10% to 50% incidence of hyperpyrexic coma
in animals pretreated with MAOIs and then given a variety of
narcotics.422-428 These reactions appear to be treated best by
supportive care. Alternative drugs for the treatment of severe
depression include the tricyclic antidepressant drugs: amitriptyline,
imipramine, desipramine, doxepin, nortriptyline, trazodone, and
others.422,423 Tricyclic antidepressant drugs also block the reuptake of
neurotransmitters and cause their acute release. Given on a long-term
basis, these drugs decrease stores of noradrenergic catecholamines.
Tricyclic antidepressant drugs also produce side effects similar to
those of atropine (dry mouth, tachycardia, delirium, urinary retention)
and can cause changes on the ECG (changes in the T wave, prolongation of
the QRS complex, bundle branch block or other conduction abnormalities,
or PVCs). Although arrhythmias induced by tricyclic antidepressants have
been treated successfully with physostigmine, bradycardia has sometimes
occurred.422,423 Drug interactions with tricyclic antidepressants
include those related to blockade of the reuptake of norepinephrine.
Such interactions, although predictable for a population of patients,
may not alter a patient's threshold for arrhythmias. The selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors have gained popularity and include
citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and
sertraline, though these can also have serious side effects. For
instance, fluoxetine causes nausea, vomiting, headaches, nervousness,
and possibly paranoia and ideas of suicide more commonly than do the
tricyclics422,423; however, it is less likely to cause systemic
anticholinergic effects or orthostatic hypotension. Bupropion, which is
fundamentally different than the SSRIs, may cause nausea, vomiting,
seizures, agitation, tremor, excitement, and increased motor activity,
but it only rarely
causes anticholinergic effects or orthostatic hypotension. Discontinuing
drugs can cause withdrawal symptoms or precipitate recurrence of
psychiatric illness. Switching among drugs for depression can cause
hyperpyrexia and coma; thus switching drugs preoperatively should not be
requested casually.422,423 The effectiveness of phenothiazines and
butyrophenones in schizophrenia suggests a dopamine receptor blocking
action. In addition, these drugs possess varying degrees of
parasympathetic stimulation and ability to block α-adrenergic receptors.
The phenothiazines include chlorpromazine, promazine, triflupromazine,
fluphenazine, trifluoperazine, prochlorperazine, and many others. The
butyrophenones include droperidol and haloperidol. Both the
phenothiazines and butyrophenones produce sedation, depression, and
antihistaminic, antiemetic, and hypothermic responses. They are also
associated with cholestatic jaundice, impotence, dystonia, and
photosensitivity. Other side effects associated with phenothiazines
include orthostatic hypotension (partly as a result of α-adrenergic
blockade) and abnormalities on the ECG such as prolongation of the QT or
PR intervals, blunting of T waves, depression of the ST segment, and on
rare occasion, PVCs and torsades de pointes.422,423,429,430 Several
important drug interactions are noteworthy for the phenothiazine
derivatives. The effects of CNS depressants (especially narcotics and
barbiturates) are enhanced by the concomitant administration of
phenothiazines. In addition, the CNS seizure threshold is lowered by the
administration of phenothiazines, which should be avoided in patients
who are epileptic or withdrawing from any drug that depresses the CNS.
Lithium carbonate is used to treat manic depression, but it is more
effective in preventing mania than in relieving depression. In excitable
cells, lithium mimics sodium and decreases the release of
neurotransmitters both centrally and peripherally. Lithium prolongs
neuromuscular blockade and may decrease anesthetic requirements because
it blocks brainstem release of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and
dopamine. Psychoactive drugs such as the amphetamines (including
methamphetamines, and crystal methamphetamine) and cocaine acutely
release norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine and block their
reuptake. Taken on a long-term basis, they deplete nerve endings of
these neurotransmitters. Drugs that appear to increase central
α-adrenergic release increase anesthetic requirements, whereas drugs
that appear to decrease central α-adrenergic release decrease anesthetic
requirements. (This may not be the mechanism by which they alter
anesthetic requirements, but it is a convenient way of remembering the
alteration.) Drugs that affect only the β-adrenergic receptors do not
alter anesthetic requirements.

ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS Antiarrhythmic drugs include local anesthetics
(lidocaine, procaine), anticonvulsant (phenytoin), β-adrenergic blocking
agents, calcium channel blocking drugs, or primary antiarrhythmic drugs.
These drugs are classified into five major categories: local anesthetics
that alter phase 0 and phase 4 depolarization (quinidine, procainamide,
and flecainide), local anesthetics that affect only phase 4
depolarization
(lidocaine, mexiletine, tocainide, phenytoin, encainide), β-adrenergic
receptor antagonists, antiadrenergic drugs (bretylium, disopyramide,
amiodarone), and calcium entry blockers. A lack of adverse reports does
not imply that all these drugs should be continued through the time of
surgery. The pharmacologic characteristics of the various antiarrhythmic
drugs can affect anesthetic management. Disopyramide is similar to
quinidine and procainamide in its antiarrhythmic effectiveness.
Disopyramide is excreted mainly by the kidneys, but hepatic disease
increases its half-life. This drug often produces anticholinergic
effects, including tachycardia, urinary retention, and psychosis.
Hepatitis has also been reported to have occurred after its use.431
Little is known of the interaction of bretylium with anesthetic agents;
however, since it blocks the release of catecholamines, long-term
therapy with this drug has been associated with hypersensitivity to
vasopressors.431 Quinidine depends on the kidneys for excretion, can
produce vagolytic effects that can decrease AV block, and is associated
with blood dyscrasias and GI disturbances.431 Most of the antiarrhythmic
drugs enhance nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade. Reports have
confirmed this enhancement for quinidine, phenytoin, lidocaine,
procainamide, and propranolol.432-440 No data document such an effect
for depolarizing muscle relaxants. Amiodarone, an antiadrenergic drug
used to treat recurrent supraventricular and ventricular tachycardia,
causes thyroid dysfunction as a result of the large amount of iodine in
its structure, as well as peripheral neuropathy, and has been associated
with hypertension, bradyarrhythmias, and reduced cardiac output during
anesthesia.441 The drug has a half-life of 29 days, and its
pharmacologic effects persist for more than 45 days after
discontinuance.442

ANTIBIOTICS Many antibacterial drugs are nephrotoxic or neurotoxic, or
both, and many prolong neuromuscular blockade.434-443 The only
antibiotics devoid of neuromuscular effects appear to be penicillin G
and the cephalosporins.439 Most enzymeinducing drugs do not increase the
metabolism of the volatile agents. Appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis
for surgery requires a knowledge of the probability of infection for
that type of surgical procedure and, if the incidence of infection
warrants, the use of a drug regimen directed against the most likely
infecting organisms.443

MEDICATIONS FOR GLAUCOMA Medications for glaucoma include two
organophosphates: echothiophate and isoflurophate. These drugs inhibit
serum cholinesterase, which is responsible for the hydrolysis and
inactivation of succinylcholine and estertype local anesthetics such as
procaine, chloroprocaine, and tetracaine.444,445 These ester-type local
anesthetics should be avoided in patients treated with eye drops
containing organophosphate. Table 32.15 lists other medications related
to anesthesia and their side effects (from the National Registry for
Drug-Induced Ocular Side Effects, Oregon Health Sciences University,
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97201; 503-279-8456).
TABLE 32.15 Common Ophthalmologic Drugs and Their Anesthetically
Important Interactions Drug (Trade Name)

Toxicities and Specific Treatments

GLAUCOMA: PRIMARY GOAL IS TO REDUCE IOP BY Miotics and epinephrine:
increase outflow of aqueous humor β-Blockade and carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors: reduce production of aqueous humor Osmotic drugs:
transiently decrease volume MIOTICS Parasympathomimetics Pilocarpine
(Adsorbocarpine, Isopto Carpine, Pilocar, Pilocel) Carbachol
ACETYLCHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS Physostigmine Demecarium Isoflurophate
(Floropryl) Echothiophate (Echodide, Phospholine)

Tox: Hypersalivation, sweating, N/V, bradycardia, hypotension,
bronchospasm, CNS effects, coma, respiratory arrest, death Rx: Atropine,
pralidoxime (Protopam) Ix: Succinylcholine---prolonged apnea (drugs must
be discontinued 4 weeks before)

EPINEPHRINE (EPITRATE, MUROCOLL, MYTRATE, EPIFRIN, GLAUCON, EPINAL,
EPPY)

Tox: (rare) Tachycardia, PVCs, HTN, headache, tremors Ix: Avoid drugs
that sensitize to catecholamines (e.g., halothane)

β-BLOCKERS Timolol (Timoptic) Betaxolol (Betoptic) Levobunolol (Betagan)

Tox: β-Blockade with bradycardia, exacerbation of asthma, CNS
depression, lethargy, confusion Synergy noted with systemic drugs

CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS Acetazolamide (Diamox) Dichlorphenamide
(Daranide, Oratrol) Ethoxzolamide (Cardrase, Ethamide) Methazolamide
(Neptazane)

Tox: Anorexia, GI disturbances, "general miserable feeling" and malaise,
paresthesias, diuresis, hypokalemia (transient), renal colic and
calculi, hyperuricemia, thrombocytopenia, aplastic anemia, acute
respiratory failure in patients with COPD

OSMOTIC DRUGS Glycerin (Glyrol, Osmoglyn) Isosorbide (Ismotic) Urea
(Urevert, Ureaphil) Mannitol (Osmitrol) Intraocular acetylcholine
(Miochol)

Tox: Dehydration, hyperglycemia, nonketotic hyperosmolar coma (rare);
fatalities with mannitol secondary to CHF or intracranial bleeding; urea
may cause thrombosis Tox: Hypotension, bradycardia Rx: Atropine

MYDRIATICS AND CYCLOPLEGICS: PROVIDE PUPILLARY DILATATION AND PARALYSIS
OF ACCOMMODATION Anticholinergics block muscarinic receptors; paralyzing
in iris α-Adrenergics contract the dilator of the iris ANTICHOLINERGICS
Atropine (Atropisol, Bufopto, Isopto Atropine) Cyclopentolate, alone
(Cyclogyl) or with phenylephrine-homatropine (Cyclomydril) Homatropine
(Homatrocel, Isopto Homatropine) Scopolamine (Isopto Hyoscine, Murocoll
19) Tropicamide (Mydriacyl)

Tox: Dry mouth, flushing, thirst, tachycardia, seizure, hyperactivity,
transient psychosis, rare coma, and death Rx: Physostigmine

β-ADRENERGICS Phenylephrine (Efricel, Mydfrin, Neo-Synephrine)
Hydroxyamphetamine (Paredrine)

Tox: Tachycardia, HTN, PVCs, myocardial ischemia, agitation

CHF, Congestive heart failure; CNS, central nervous system; COPD,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; GI, gastrointestinal; HTN,
hypertension; IOP, intraocular pressure; Ix, interaction; N/V, nausea
and vomiting; PVCs, premature ventricular contractions; Rx, treatment;
Tox, toxicity. Modified from the National Registry for Drug-Induced
Ocular Side Effects, University of Oregon Health Sciences Center,
Portland, OR.