Anesthetic Implications of Concurrent Diseases JESSE KIEFER, MONTY
MYTHEN, MICHAEL F. ROIZEN, and LEE A. FLEISHER
The preoperative evaluation also represents a time
when education on tobacco cessation, physical inactivity, brain health,
and poor food choices can be discussed. The importance of integrating
physicians' expertise is even greater within the context of the
increasing life-span of our population. As the number of older adults
and very old adults (those \>85 years old) grows, so does the need of
surgical patients for preoperative consultation to help plan for
comorbidity, frailty, and multiple drug regimens, the knowledge of which
is crucial to successful patient management. At a time when medical
information is encyclopedic, it is difficult, if not impossible, for
even the most conscientious anesthesiologist to keep abreast of the
medical issues relevant to every aspect of perioperative 
or periprocedure patient management. This chapter reviews such issues
with primary emphasis on the anesthesiologist providing preoperative
evaluation and care, rather than transferring these responsibilities to
other providers. As with "healthy" patients, the history and physical
examination most accurately predict not only the associated risks but
also the likelihood of whether a monitoring technique, change in
therapy, or "prehabilitation" will be beneficial or necessary for
survival. This chapter emphasizes instances in which specific
information should be sought in history taking, physical examination, or
laboratory evaluation. Although controlled studies designed to confirm
that optimizing a patient's preoperative or preprocedure physical
condition would result in a less frequent rate of morbidity have not
been performed for most diseases, it is logical to assume that such is
the case. That such preventive measures would cost less than treating
the morbidity that would otherwise occur is an important consideration
in a cost-conscious environment. Minimally invasive procedures such as
cataract extraction, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or diagnostic
arthroscopy, performed in conjunction with the best current anesthetic
practices, may pose no greater risk than daily living and thus may not
be considered an opportunity for special evaluation. Nevertheless, the
preoperative evaluation may identify conditions that could change
perioperative management and that may improve both throughput of surgery
and the speed of recovery. Examples include the following: ensuring the
administration of long-term medications such as a β-adrenergic blocking
drug, aspirin for patients with coronary stents, or a statin (or any
combination); administering a histamine type 2 (H2) antagonist 1 to 2
hours before entry into the operating room; ensuring the availability of
equipment to measure blood glucose levels; obtaining a history of the
patient's diabetic course and treatment from the primary care physician,
as well as from the patient; and performing a fiberoptic laryngoscopic
examination or procuring additional skilled attention. The following
conditions are discussed in this chapter: 1. Diseases involving the
endocrine system and disorders of nutrition (discussed first because of
its increasing importance to care) 2. Diseases involving the
cardiovascular system 3. Disorders of the respiratory and immune system
4. Diseases  of the central nervous system (CNS), neuromuscular
diseases, and mental disorders 5. Diseases involving the kidney,
infectious diseases, and disorders of electrolytes 6. Diseases involving
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract or the liver 7. Diseases involving
hematopoiesis and various forms of cancer 8. Diseases of aging or those
that occur more commonly in older adults, as well as chronic and acute
medical conditions requiring drug therapy

Role of the Primary Care Physician or Consultant The roles of the
primary care physician or consultant are not to select and suggest
anesthetic or surgical methods but

BOX 32.1 Guidelines for Consultation Practice  omplete a prompt,
thorough, generalist-oriented evaluation. C Respond specifically to the
question or questions posed. □ Indicate clearly the perioperative
importance of any observations and recommendations outside the area of
initial concern. □ Provide focused, detailed, and precise diagnostic and
therapeutic guidance. □ Emphasize verbal communication with the
anesthesiologist and surgeon, particularly to resolve complex issues. □
Avoid chart notations that unnecessarily create or exacerbate regulatory
or medicolegal risk. □ Use frequent follow-up visits in difficult cases
to monitor clinical status and compliance with recommendations. □ □

From American College of Physicians. Medical consultation. Medical
Knowledge Self-Assessment Program IX. Part C. Book 4. Philadelphia:
American College of Physicians; 1992: 939.

rather to optimize the patient's preoperative and preprocedure status
regarding conditions that increase the morbidity and mortality
associated with surgery and to alert the anesthesia care team about
these conditions. Within the context of shared decision making, the
primary care physician may also be involved in the decision to proceed
with surgery. Quotations and a box in a Medical Knowledge SelfAssessment
Program published by the leading organization representing internists,
the American College of Physicians, highlight this role for the
consultant1: Effective interaction with colleagues in other specialties
requires a thorough grounding in the language and science of these other
disciplines as well as an awareness of basic guidelines for consultation
\[Box 32.1\]. The consulting internists' role in perioperative care is
focused on the elucidation of medical factors that may increase the
risks of anesthesia and surgery. Selecting the anesthetic technique for
a given patient, procedure, surgeon, and anesthetist is highly
individualized and remains the responsibility of the anesthesiologist
rather than the internist. Optimizing a patient's preoperative and
preprocedure condition and, in settings with a preoperative clinic,
counseling a patient about needed future lifestyle changes such as
exercise, food choices, and tobacco cessation are cooperative ventures
between the anesthesiologist and the internist, pediatrician, surgeon,
or family physician. If available, the primary care physician should
affirm that the patient is in the very best physical state attainable
(for that patient), or the anesthesiologist and primary care physician
should do what is necessary to optimize that condition. Although not yet
definitively proven, prehabilitation prior to surgery has been advocated
by many groups. Primary care physicians can prepare and treat a patient
to provide optimal conditions for daily life. The preoperative clinic
should collaborate with the primary care physician to start the process
of preparing the patient for the needs of surgery or complex procedures.
Although such education is more readily available and of better quality
than in previous decades, and although cardiologic organizations have
provided considerable data on the importance of this aspect of care,2-4
the primary care physician's training, knowledge,
and ability may not include an in-depth understanding of the
perioperative evaluation. Without understanding the physiologic changes
that occur perioperatively, appropriate therapy is difficult to
prescribe. It is therefore part of the anesthesiologist's job to guide
the patient's consultants about the type of information needed from the
preoperative and preprocedure consultation.

Diseases Involving the Endocrine System and Disorders of Nutrition
PANCREATIC DISORDERS Preoperative and Preprocedure Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous group of disorders that have the
common feature of a relative or absolute insulin deficiency. The disease
is characterized by a multitude of hormone-induced metabolic
abnormalities, diffuse microvascular lesions, and long-term end organ
complications. The diagnosis of diabetes is made with a fasting blood
glucose level greater than 110 mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L), and impaired glucose
tolerance is diagnosed if the fasting glucose level is less than 110
mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L) but greater than 100 mg/ dL (5.5 mmol/L). Diabetes
can be divided into two very different diseases that share the same
long-term end-organ complications. Type 1 diabetes is associated with
autoimmune diseases and has a concordance rate of 40% to 50% (i.e., if
one of a pair of monozygotic twins had diabetes, the likelihood that the
other twin would have diabetes is 40%-50%). In type 1 diabetes, the
patient is insulin deficient, principally from autoimmune destruction of
the pancreatic β cells, and susceptible to ketoacidosis if insulin is
withheld. Type 2 diabetes has a concordance rate approaching 80% (i.e.,
genetic material is both necessary and sufficient for the development of
type 2 diabetes).4a How markedly the aging and end-organ effects of
these genes are expressed is based on lifestyle choices of food and
physical activity. These patients are not susceptible to the development
of ketoacidosis in the absence of insulin, and they have peripheral
insulin resistance through multiple defects with insulin action and
secretion. Patients with non--insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes
account for the majority (\>90%) of the diabetic patients in Europe and
North America. These individuals tend to be overweight, relatively
resistant to ketoacidosis, and susceptible to the development of a
hyperglycemic-hyperosmolar nonketotic state. Plasma insulin levels are
normal or increased in type 2 diabetes but are relatively low for the
level of blood glucose. This hyperinsulinemia by itself is postulated to
cause accelerated cardiovascular disease. Gestational diabetes develops
in more than 3% of all pregnancies and increases the risk of developing
type 2 diabetes by 17% to 63% within 15 years. Type 1 and type 2
diabetes differ in other ways as well. Contrary to long-standing belief,
a patient's age does not allow a firm distinction between type 1 and
type 2 diabetes; type 1 diabetes can develop in an older person, and
clearly, type 2 diabetes can develop in overweight children. Type 1
diabetes is associated with a 15% prevalence of other autoimmune
diseases, including Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, Addison
disease, and myasthenia gravis. Over the next decade, the prevalence of
diabetes is expected to increase by 50%. This growth is primarily the
result of the increase in type 2 diabetes caused by excessive weight
gain in adults and now also in the pediatric population. Large clinical
studies show that long-term, strict control of blood glucose levels and
arterial blood pressure, along with regular physical activity, results
in a major delay in microvascular complications and perhaps indefinite
postponement of type 2 diabetes in patients.5,6 The common administered
drugs can be classified into eight major groups: acarbose, biguanides
(e.g., metformin), dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (e.g., sitagliptin,
saxagliptin, vildagliptin), glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
(e.g., albiglutide, dulagutide, or exenatide), meglitinide (e.g.,
repaglinide or nateglinide), sodium-glucose transport protein 2
inhibitors (e.g., canagliflozin or empagliflozin), sulfonylureas (e.g.,
glibenclamide, glipizide, glimepiride, gliquidone), and
thiazolidinediones (e.g., pioglitazone or rosiglitazone).6a Patients
with insulin-dependent diabetes tend to be younger, nonobese, and
susceptible to the development of ketoacidosis. Plasma insulin levels
are low or un-measurable, and therapy requires insulin replacement.
Patients with insulin-dependent diabetes experience an increase in their
insulin requirements in the post-midnight hours, which may result in
early morning hyperglycemia (dawn phenomenon). This accelerated glucose
production and impaired glucose use reflect nocturnal surges in
secretion of growth hormone (GH). Physiologically normal patients and
diabetic patients taking insulin have steady-state levels of insulin in
their blood. Absorption of insulin is highly variable and depends on the
type and species of insulin, the site of administration, and
subcutaneous blood flow. Nevertheless, attainment of a steady state
depends on periodic administration of the preparations received by the
patient. Thus it seems logical to continue the insulin combination
perioperatively that the patient had been receiving after assessing
previous blood glucose control.6b The major risk factors for diabetic
patients undergoing surgery are the end-organ diseases associated with
diabetes: cardiovascular dysfunction, renal insufficiency, joint
collagen tissue abnormalities (limitation in neck extension, poor wound
healing), inadequate granulocyte production, neuropathies, and
infectious complications.7-15 Thus a major focus of the anesthesiologist
should be the preoperative and preprocedure evaluation and treatment of
these diseases to ensure optimal preoperative and preprocedure
conditions. Poor preoperative glucose control, as measured by the
hemoglobin A1C (glycosylated hemoglobin) level, is an independent
predictor of worse perioperative outcome.16-18
Glucotoxicity Long-term tight control of blood glucose has been
motivated by concern for three potential glucotoxicities, in addition to
the results from major randomized outcome studies involving diabetic
patients.5-13 1. Glucose itself may be toxic because high levels can
promote nonenzymatic glycosylation reactions that lead to the formation
of abnormal proteins. These proteins may weaken endothelial junctions
and decrease elastance, which is responsible for the stiff joint
syndrome (and difficult intubation secondary to fixation of the
atlantooccipital joint), as well as decrease wound-healing tensile
strength.
2.  Glycemia also disrupts autoregulation. Glucose-induced vasodilation
    prevents target organs from protecting against increases in systemic
    blood pressure. A glycosylated hemoglobin level of 8.1% is the
    threshold at which the risk for microalbuminuria increases
    logarithmically. A person with type 1 diabetes who has
    microalbuminuria of greater than 29 mg/day has an 80% chance of
    experiencing renal insufficiency. The threshold for glycemic
    toxicity differs for various vascular beds. For example, the
    threshold for retinopathy is a glycosylated hemoglobin value of 8.5%
    to 9.0% (12.5 mmol/L or 225 mg/dL), and that for cardiovascular
    disease is an average blood glucose value of 5.4 mmol/L (96 mg/dL).
    Thus different degrees of hyperglycemia may be required before
    different vascular beds are damaged. Another view is that perhaps
    severe hyperglycemia and microalbuminuria are simply concomitant
    effects of a common underlying cause. For instance, diabetic
    patients in whom microalbuminuria develops are more resistant to
    insulin, insulin resistance is associated with microalbuminuria in
    first-degree relatives of patients with type 2 diabetes, and persons
    who are normoglycemic but subsequently have clinical diabetes are at
    risk for atherogenesis before the onset of disease. Diabetes itself
    may not be as important to perioperative outcome as are its
    end-organ effects. Epidemiologic studies segregated the effects of
    diabetes itself on the organ system from the effects of the
    complications of diabetes (e.g., cardiac, nervous system, renal, and
    vascular disease) and the effects of old age and the accelerated
    aging that diabetes causes. Even in patients requiring intensive
    care unit (ICU) management, long-standing diabetes does not appear
    to be as important an issue as the end-organ dysfunction that exists
    and the degree of glucose control in the perioperative or
    periprocedure and ICU periods.6b,8-13 The World Health
    Organization's surgical safety checklist bundle suggests control
    with a target perioperative blood glucose concentration of 6 to 10
    mmol/L (acceptable range, 4-12 mmol/L) or 100 to 180 mg/dL.19 Poor
    perioperative glycemic control has a significant impact on the risk
    of postoperative infection across a variety of surgical
    specialities.20 Different regimens permit almost any degree of
    perioperative control of blood glucose levels, but the tighter the
    control desired, the greater the risk of hypoglycemia. Therefore,
    debate regarding optimal control during the perioperative period has
    been extensive. Tight control retards all these glucotoxicities and
    may have other benefits in retarding the severity of diabetes
    itself.5-13,21 Management of intraoperative glucose may be
    influenced by specific situations, such as the following: the type
    of operation, pregnancy,22 expected global CNS insult, the bias of
    the patient's primary care physician, or the type of diabetes. Much
    of the research on perioperative control is derived from studies in
    the ICU, as opposed to the operating room. The first major trial
    demonstrating the benefit of tight glucose control was in medical
    ICU patients in Leuven, Belgium.23 The most recent trial was from
    the NICE-SUGAR (Normoglycemia in Intensive Care Evaluation and
    Survival Using Glucose Algorithm Regulation) group.24 In this
    randomized controlled trial, the investigators examined the
    associations between moderate and severe hypoglycemia

(blood glucose, 41-70 mg/dL \[2.3-3.9 mmol/L\] and ≤40 mg/dL \[2.2
mmol/L\], respectively) and death among 6026 critically ill patients in
ICUs. Intensive glucose control leads to moderate and severe
hypoglycemia, both of which are associated with an increased risk of
death. The association exhibits a dose-response relationship and is
strongest for death from distributive shock. The optimal perioperative
management has been reviewed elsewhere.25 Guidelines have been developed
on the use of insulin infusions in the critical care unit to achieve
these goals (Table 32.1).26

Diabetes and Accelerated Physiologic Aging Adverse perioperative
outcomes have repeatedly and substantially correlated with the age of
the patient,2,3,27-30 and diabetes does cause physiologic aging. When
one translates the results of the Diabetes Control and Complications
Trials into age-induced physiologic changes, a patient with type 1
diabetes who has poor control of blood glucose ages approximately 1.75
years physiologically for every chronologic year of the disease and 1.25
years if blood glucose has been controlled tightly.27-29 A patient with
type 2 diabetes ages approximately 1.5 years for every chronologic year
of the disease and approximately 1.06 years with tight control of blood
glucose and blood pressure.6,27-29,31 Thus when providing care for a
diabetic patient, one must consider the associated risks to be those of
a person who is much older physiologically; the physiologic age of a
diabetic patient is considerably older than that person's calendar age
just by virtue of having the disease.1 Obesity and lack of physical
exercise seem to be major contributors to the increasing prevalence of
type 2 diabetes. As with type 1 diabetes, tight control of blood
glucose, increased physical activity, and reduction in weight appear to
reduce the accelerated aging associated with type 2 diabetes, and
possibly delay the appearance of the disease and aging from it
substantially.27-29,31 Although such a reduction in aging should reduce
the perioperative risk for diabetic patients, no controlled trials have
confirmed this theory. The key to managing blood glucose levels
perioperatively in diabetic patients is to set clear goals and then
monitor blood glucose levels frequently enough to adjust therapy to
achieve these goals.31a Other Conditions Associated With Diabetes
Diabetes is associated with microangiopathy (in retinal and renal
vessels), peripheral neuropathy, autonomic dysfunction, and infection.
Diabetic patients are often treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors, even in the absence of gross hypertension, in an
effort to prevent the effects of disordered autoregulation, including
renal failure.5,6,32 Preoperatively, assessment and optimization of
treatment of the potential and potent end-organ effects of diabetes are
at least as important as assessment of the diabetic patient's current
overall metabolic status. The preoperative evaluation of diabetic
patients is also discussed in Chapter 31. The presence of autonomic
neuropathy likely makes the operative period more hazardous and the
postoperative period crucial to survival. Evidence of autonomic
neuropathy may be routinely sought before the surgical procedure.
Patients with diabetic autonomic neuropathy are at increased risk for
gastroparesis (and consequent aspiration
TABLE 32.1 Recommended Glucose Target Ranges for Intensive Care Patients
and Related Subgroups

Society, Guideline

Patient Group

Trigger Blood Glucose Value to Start Insulin Infusion (mM \[mg/dL\])

Society of Critical Care Medicine's ­clinical practice guideline26

General recommendation

8.3 (150)

Cardiac surgical patients

American Diabetes Association guidelines446

American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists447

Target range, (mM \[mg/dL\]) 5.6-8.3 (100-150) \<8.3 (150)

Critically ill trauma patients

8.3 (150)

\<10 (180)

Patients with traumatic brain injury

8.3 (150)

\<10 (180)

Neurologic ICU patients Ischemic stroke Intraparenchymal ­hemorrhage
Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage

8.3 (150)

\<10 (180)

General recommendation

10 (180)

7.8-10 (140-180)

Decreased risk for deep sternal wound infection and death73,118-121

Adaptation

6.1-7.8 (110-140)

General recommendation

7.8-10 (140-180)

Surgical patients

Lower range

Only in units showing low rates of hypoglycemia

\<10 (180)

Based on the NICE-SUGAR study If insulin infusion is applied; however,
guideline does not recommend intensive insulin therapy

Surviving Sepsis Campaign448

General recommendation

Clinical Practical Guideline from the American College of ­Physicians449

General recommendation

7.8-11.1 (140-200)

Spanish Society of Intensive Care Medicine and Coronary Units450

General recommendation

\<8.3 (150)

French Society of Anesthesia and Intensive Care451

General recommendation

10 (180)

Surgical patients

\<6.1 (110)

Cardiac patients

\<6.1 (110)

Cardiac surgical patients

\<10 (180) except \<8.3 (150) for those with devices in place

Society of Thoracic Surgeons452

Rationale

10 (180)

Adjust to lower target range in documented low rate of severe
hypoglycemia

ICU, Intensive care unit; NICE-SUGAR, normoglycemia in intensive care
evaluation and survival using glucose algorithm regulation. Data from
Sebranek JJ, Lugli AK, Coursin DB. Glycaemic control in the
perioperative period. Br J Anaesth. 2013;111(suppl 1):i18--i34; and
Jacobi J, Bircher N, Krinsley J, et al. Guidelines for the use of an
insulin infusion for the management of hyperglycemia in critically ill
patients. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:3251--3276.

of gastric contents) and for perioperative cardiorespiratory arrest.
Diabetic patients who exhibit signs of autonomic neuropathy, such as
early satiety, lack of sweating, lack of pulse rate change with
inspiration or orthostatic maneuvers, and impotence, have a very
frequent incidence of painless myocardial ischemia.15,33 Administration
of metoclopramide, 10 mg preoperatively to facilitate gastric emptying
of solids, may be helpful (Fig. 32.1). Interference with respiration or
sinus automaticity by pneumonia or by anesthetic agents, pain
medications, or sedative drugs is likely the precipitating cause in most
cases of sudden cardiorespiratory arrest. Measuring the degree of sinus
arrhythmia or

beat-to-beat variability provides a simple, accurate test for
significant autonomic neuropathy. The difference between the maximum and
minimum heart rate on deep inspiration is normally 15 beats/min, but it
is 5 beats/min or less in all patients who subsequently sustain
cardiorespiratory arrest.15,33 Other characteristics of patients with
autonomic neuropathy include postural hypotension with a decrease in
arterial blood pressure of more than 30 mm Hg, resting tachycardia,
nocturnal diarrhea, and dense peripheral neuropathy. Diabetic patients
with significant autonomic neuropathy may have impaired respiratory
responses to

Radionuclide remaining in stomach (%)

100 90

80

(1) 

70 60 50 (2)

40

(3) 

30 0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time (min) Fig. 32.1 Gastric emptying time (mean ± standard deviation)
of a solid test meal in three groups of patients: diabetic patients
(line 1), diabetic patients given metoclopramide (10 mg intravenously)
1.5 hours before the test meal (line 2), and nondiabetic patients (line
3). (From Wright RA, Clemente R, Wathen R. Diabetic gastroparesis: an
abnormality of gastric emptying of solids. Am J Med Sci.
1985;289:240--242.)

hypoxia and are particularly sensitive to the action of drugs that have
depressant effects. These patients may warrant continuous cardiac and
respiratory monitoring for 24 to 72 hours postoperatively, although this
has not been tested in a rigorous, controlled trial.15 In the absence of
autonomic neuropathy, outpatient surgery is preferred for a diabetic
patient if possible (see Table 32.1).31a

Emergency Surgery Many diabetic patients requiring emergency surgery for
trauma or infection have significant metabolic decompensation, including
ketoacidosis. Frequently, little time is available to stabilize the
patient, but even a few hours may be sufficient for correction of any
fluid and electrolyte disturbances that are potentially
life-threatening. It is futile to delay surgery in an attempt to
eliminate ketoacidosis completely if the underlying surgical condition
will lead to further metabolic deterioration. The likelihood of
intraoperative cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension resulting from
ketoacidosis will be reduced if intravascular volume depletion and
hypokalemia are at least partially treated. During the initial
resuscitation phase of ketoacidosis bicarbonate should initially be
avoided with crystalloid fluids, potassium repletion, and intravenous
insulin therapy favored.33a Insulin therapy is initiated with a 10-unit
intravenous bolus of regular insulin, followed by continuous insulin
infusion. The rate of infusion is determined most easily by dividing the
last serum glucose value by 150 (or 100 if the patient is receiving
steroids, has an infection, or is considerably overweight \[body mass
index ≥35\]). The actual amount of insulin administered is less
important than is regular monitoring of glucose, potassium, and arterial
pH. The maximum rate of glucose decline is fairly constant, averaging 75
to 100 mg/dL/h, regardless of the dose of

insulin because the number of insulin binding sites is limited.34 During
the first 1 to 2 hours of fluid resuscitation, the glucose level may
decrease more precipitously. When serum glucose reaches 250 mg/dL, the
intravenous fluid should include 5% dextrose. The volume of
intravenously administered fluid required varies with the overall
deficit; it ranges from 3 to 5 L and may be as large as 10 L. Despite
losses of water in excess of losses of solute, sodium levels are
generally normal or reduced. Factitious hyponatremia caused by
hyperglycemia or hypertriglyceridemia may result in this seeming
contradiction. The plasma sodium concentration decreases by
approximately 1.6 mEq/L for every 100 mg/ dL increase in plasma glucose
greater than normal. Initially, balanced crystalloid solution is infused
at a rate of 250 to 1000 mL/h, depending on the degree of intravascular
volume depletion and cardiac status. Some measure of left ventricular
volume should be monitored in diabetic patients who have a history of
myocardial dysfunction. Approximately one third of the estimated fluid
deficit is corrected during the first 6 to 8 hours and the remaining two
thirds over the next 24 hours.34a The degree of acidosis is determined
by analysis of arterial blood gases and detection of an increased anion
gap (see also Chapter 48). Acidosis with an increased anion gap (≥16
mEq/L) in an acutely ill diabetic patient may be caused by ketones in
ketoacidosis, lactic acid in lactic acidosis, increased organic acids
from renal insufficiency, or all three disorders. In ketoacidosis,
plasma levels of acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone are
increased. Plasma and urinary ketones can be measured semiquantitatively
with Ketostix and Acetest tablets. The role of bicarbonate therapy in
diabetic ketoacidosis is controversial, but could be considered in
severe acidemia and hemodynamic instability as myocardial function and
respiration are known to be depressed at a blood pH lower than 7.00 to
7.10.34b This careful consideration is because rapid correction of
acidosis with bicarbonate therapy may result in alterations in CNS
function and structure. These alterations may be caused by (1)
paradoxical development of cerebrospinal fluid and CNS acidosis from
rapid conversion of bicarbonate to carbon dioxide and diffusion of the
acid across the blood-brain barrier, (2) altered CNS oxygenation with
decreased cerebral blood flow, and (3) the development of unfavorable
osmotic gradients. After treatment with fluids and insulin,
β-hydroxybutyrate levels decrease rapidly, whereas acetoacetate levels
may remain stable or even increase before declining. Plasma acetone
levels remain elevated for 24 to 42 hours, long after blood glucose,
β-hydroxybutyrate, and acetoacetate levels have returned to normal; the
result is continuing ketonuria.34 Persistent ketosis with a serum
bicarbonate level less than 20 mEq/L in the presence of a normal glucose
concentration is an indication of the continued need for intracellular
glucose and insulin for reversal of lipolysis. The most important
electrolyte disturbance in diabetic ketoacidosis is depletion of
total-body potassium. Deficits range from 3 to 10 mEq/kg body weight.
Serum potassium levels decline rapidly and reach a nadir within 2 to 4
hours after the start of intravenous insulin administration. Aggressive
replacement therapy is required. The potassium administered moves into
the intracellular
space with insulin as the acidosis is corrected. Potassium is also
excreted in urine because of the increased delivery of sodium to the
distal renal tubules that accompanies volume expansion. Phosphorus
deficiency in ketoacidosis as a result of tissue catabolism, impaired
cellular uptake, and increased urinary losses may give rise to
significant muscular weakness and organ dysfunction. The average
phosphorus deficit is approximately 1 mmol/kg body weight; no clear
guidance for replacement exists, but replacement is appropriate in
patients with cardiac dysfunction, anemia, respiratory depression, or if
the plasma phosphate concentration is less than 1.0 mg/dL.34

Anticipated Newer Treatments of Diabetes At least three major changes in
the care of diabetic patients have made it to the clinical trial stage:
◼ Implanted (like a pacemaker) glucose analyzer with elec-

tronic transmission to a surface (watch) monitor

◼ New islet transplantation medication that makes islet cell

transplants much more successful and rejection medication less hazardous
◼  Medications such as INGAP (islet neogenesis--associated protein)
peptide, which may cause regrowth of normally functioning islet cells
(without the need for transplantation) Some of these treatments may
radically change the therapies used in the perioperative period. If
regrowth of islet cells becomes common, type 1 diabetes could all but
disappear; if implanted minute-to-minute glucose reading is possible,
tight control may be much easier and more expected.

Insulinoma and Other Causes of Hypoglycemia Hypoglycemia in persons not
treated for diabetes is rare. Hypoglycemia in nondiabetic patients can
be caused by such diverse entities as pancreatic islet cell adenoma or
carcinoma, large hepatoma, large sarcoma, alcohol ingestion, use of
β-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs, haloperidol therapy,
hypopituitarism, adrenal insufficiency, altered physiology after gastric
or gastric bypass surgery, hereditary fructose intolerance, ingestion of
antidiabetic drugs, galactosemia, or autoimmune hypoglycemia.35 The last
four entities cause postprandial reactive hypoglycemia. Because
restriction of oral intake prevents severe hypoglycemia, the practice of
keeping the patient NPO (nothing by mouth) and infusing small amounts of
a solution containing 5% dextrose greatly lessens the possibility of
perioperative postprandial reactive hypoglycemia. The other causes of
hypoglycemia can cause serious problems during the perioperative
period.35 Symptoms of hypoglycemia fall into one of two groups:
adrenergic excess (tachycardia, palpitations, tremulousness, or
diaphoresis) or neuroglycopenia (headache, confusion, mental
sluggishness, seizures, or coma). All these symptoms may be masked by
anesthesia, so blood glucose levels should be determined frequently in
at-risk patients to ensure that hypoglycemia is not present. Because
manipulation of an insulinoma can result in massive insulin release,
this tumor should probably be operated on only at centers equipped with
a mechanical pancreas. Perioperative use of the somatostatin analogue
octreotide, which suppresses insulin release from such tumors, makes the
perioperative period safer in anecdotal experience.
DISORDERS OF NUTRITION, INCLUDING OBESITY Hyperlipoproteinemia,
Hyperlipidemia, and Hypolipidemia Hyperlipidemia may result from
obesity, estrogen or corticoid therapy, uremia, diabetes,
hypothyroidism, acromegaly, alcohol ingestion, liver disease, inborn
errors of metabolism, or pregnancy. Hyperlipidemia may cause premature
coronary, peripheral vascular disease, or pancreatitis. Coronary events
can be decreased by treating individuals with even normal levels of
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol with statins
(3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-- coenzyme A \[HMG-CoA\] reductase
inhibitors )---through an increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and
a decrease in LDL cholesterol levels. This approach has markedly
decreased the rate of myocardial reinfarction in high-risk
patients.36-38 Secondary prevention efforts were successful when these
high-risk patients stopped smoking, reduced their arterial blood
pressure, controlled stress, increased physical activity, and used
aspirin, folate, β-blocking drugs, angiotensin inhibitors, diet, and
other drugs to reduce their levels of LDL and increase their levels of
HDL. Although controlling the diet remains a major treatment modality
for all types of hyperlipidemia, the drugs fenofibrate and gemfibrozil,
which are used to treat hypertriglyceridemia, can cause myopathy,
especially in patients with hepatic or renal disease; clofibrate is also
associated with an increased incidence of gallstones. Cholestyramine
binds bile acids, as well as oral anticoagulants, digitalis drugs, and
thyroid hormones. Nicotinic acid causes peripheral vasodilation and
should probably not be continued through the morning of the surgical
procedure. Probucol (Lorelco) decreases the synthesis of apoprotein A-1;
its use is associated on rare occasion with fetid perspiration or
prolongation of the QT interval, or both, and sudden death in animals.
The West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study and its congeners
produced convincing evidence that drugs in the statin class prevent the
morbidity and mortality related to arterial aging and vascular disease,
as well as their consequences, such as coronary artery disease (CAD),
stroke, and peripheral vascular insufficiency.37 Thus, the
statins---lovastatin (Mevacor), pravastatin (Pravachol), simvastatin,
fluvastatin, atorvastatin (Lipitor), and rosuvastatin (Crestor)---are
mainstays of therapy, limited by patient tolerance most commonly
secondary to musculoskeletal complaints.38a However, the report of Downs
and coworkers from the Air Force/Texas Coronary Atherosclerosis
Prevention Study went further.37 This report showed a 37% reduction in
the risk for first acute major coronary events in patients who had no
risk factors and normal (average) LDL cholesterol levels. In this study
lovastatin did not alter mortality rates, but that had been true for
many early short-term trials with the statins. Although much of the
effect of the statins has been attributed to their lipid-lowering
effects, statins also influence endothelial function, inflammatory
responses, plaque stability, and thrombogenicity. In 2013, the American
College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA)
released a new clinical practice guideline for the treatment of blood
cholesterol in
people at high risk for cardiovascular diseases.39 They now advocate
statin therapy for the following: ◼ Patients who have cardiovascular
disease (coronary syn-

dromes, previous myocardial infarction \[MI\], stable or unstable
angina, previous stroke or transient ischemic attack, or peripheral
artery disease) ◼ Patients with an LDL cholesterol level of 190 mg/dL or
higher ◼ Patients with diabetes (type 1 or 2) who are between 40 and 75
years old ◼ Patients with an estimated 10-year risk of cardiovascular
disease greater than 7.5% (the report provided formulas for calculating
10-year risk) The 2014 National Lipid Association Recommendations for
Patient-Centered Management of Dyslipidemia further emphasize the use of
statins as a first-line therapy for dyslipidemia, but emphasize the
inclusion of non-high density lipoprotein in addition to LDL as markers
for risk. They further advocated for management of other atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease risk factors including high blood pressure,
tobacco use, and diabetes mellitus.39a Statins are drugs that block
HMG-CoA reductase, the ratelimiting enzyme of cholesterol synthesis.
Their use is occasionally accompanied by liver dysfunction, CNS
dysfunction, and severe depression not related to the high cost of each
drug and its congeners. Based on the available evidence, statin therapy
should be continued in patients already taking these drugs.40 Other
drugs that reduce LDL and increase HDL cholesterol and decrease
triglycerides are docosahexaenoic acid (an ω-3 fatty acid) and niacin.
Statins also provide the substantial benefit of reversing inflammation
in arteries, as evidenced by their ability to decrease highly specific
C-reactive protein and pull cholesterol from plaque.41 Hypolipidemic
conditions are rare diseases often associated with neuropathy, anemia,
and renal failure. Although anesthetic experience with hypolipidemic
conditions has been limited, some specific recommendations can be made:
continuation of caloric intake and intravenous administration of protein
hydrolysates and glucose should be continued throughout the
perioperative period.

Obesity Obesity is a risk factor for perioperative morbidity. In the
study of Medicare claims in which obese patients were matched to
non-obese patients undergoing surgery, the obese patients displayed
increased odds of wound infection, renal dysfunction, urinary tract
infection, hypotension, respiratory events, 30-day readmission, and a
12% longer length of stay.41a Although many conditions associated with
obesity (diabetes, hyperlipidemia, cholelithiasis, gastroesophageal
reflux disease, cirrhosis, degenerative joint and disk disease, venous
stasis with thrombotic or embolic disease, sleep disorders, and
emotional and altered body image disorders) contribute to chronic
morbidity in these patients, the main concerns for the anesthesiologist
have been the same since the 1970s---derangements of the cardiopulmonary
system. Morbid obesity with minimal or no coexisting pulmonary
conditions (e.g., no obesity-hypoventilation syndrome or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease \[COPD\]) is referred to here as "simple"
obesity. In simple obesity,

the pathophysiology of mild alterations in daytime gas exchange and
pulmonary function may also result from compression and restriction of
the chest wall and diaphragm by excess adipose tissue.42 Typically, in
obese patients, the expiratory reserve volume and functional residual
capacity are most affected and are reduced to 60% and 80% of normal,
respectively. Care must be taken with medication choice and dosing, as
simple obese patients may be more sensitive to sedative and narcotic
agents leading to hypoventilation.42a

Other Eating Disorders: Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia, and Starvation Many
endocrine and metabolic abnormalities occur in patients with anorexia
nervosa, a condition characterized by starvation to the point of 40%
loss of normal weight, hyperactivity, and a psychiatrically distorted
body image. Many anorectic patients exhibit impulsive behavior,
including suicide attempts, and intravenous drug use is much more common
than in the general population. Acidosis, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia,
hypomagnesemia, hypothermia, diabetes insipidus, and severe endocrine
abnormalities mimicking panhypopituitarism may need attention before
patients undergo anesthesia. Similar problems occur in bulimia
(bulimorexia), a condition that may affect as many as 50% of female
college students and is even unintentionally present in many older
adults. As in severe protein deficiency, anorexia nervosa and bulimia
may be accompanied by the following: alterations on the
electrocardiogram (ECG), including a prolonged QT interval,
atrioventricular (AV) block, and other arrhythmias; sensitivity to
epinephrine; and cardiomyopathy.43 Total depletion of body potassium
makes the addition of potassium to glucose solutions useful; although,
fluid administration can precipitate pulmonary edema in these patients
and should be monitored judiciously. Esophagitis, pancreatitis, and
aspiration pneumonia are more frequent in these patients, as is delayed
gastric emptying. One review reported that in patients with severe
anorexia, a body mass index less than 13 kg/m2, marked hypoglycemia or
leukocytopenia lower than 3.0 × 109/L, or both, potentially fatal
complications frequently occur.44 Intraoperatively, glucose or
catecholamine administration may lead to disturbance of electrolytes or
fatal arrhythmia. Intensive care and early nutritional support as soon
as possible postoperatively are important to prevent surgical site
infection with close monitoring for refeeding syndrome.

HYPERALIMENTATION (TOTAL PARENTERAL OR ENTERAL NUTRITION)
Hyperalimentation (i.e., total parenteral nutrition \[TPN\]) consists of
concentrating hypertonic glucose calories in the normal daily fluid
requirements. The solutions contain protein hydrolysates, soybean
emulsions (i.e., Intralipid), or synthetic amino acids (or any
combination of these ingredients). The major benefits of TPN or enteral
nutrition have been fewer complications postoperatively and shorter
hospital stays for patients scheduled to have no oral feeding for 7 days
or who were malnourished preoperatively.45,46 Starker and colleagues
found that the response to TPN, as monitored by serum albumin levels,
predicted the postoperative outcome.47 The group of patients
demonstrating

Depletion

Serum albumin (g %)

A

delivery to remain the same. Hypophosphatemia of less than 1.0 mg/dL of
blood may cause hemolytic anemia, cardiac failure, tachypnea, neurologic
symptoms, seizures, and death. In addition, long-term TPN is associated
with deficiencies in trace metals such as copper (refractory anemia),
zinc (impaired wound healing), and magnesium.

Repletion

B

1007

C

3.6 3.5 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.0 2.9

ADRENOCORTICAL MALFUNCTION

0

5

10 0

5

10

15 0

5

10

15

Days Fig. 32.2 The response to hyperalimentation (A, repletion), as
measured by variation in serum albumin levels, predicted the outcome of
surgery. Patients who responded (B) to nutritional support with
increased albumin levels had a significantly better outcome than did
those whose albumin level did not increase (C). See the text for a more
complete explanation. (Modified from Starker PM, Group FE, Askanazi J,
et al. Serum albumin levels as an index of nutritional support. Surgery.
1982;91:194--199.)

an increase in serum albumin concentrations from TPN had diuresis,
weight loss, and fewer complications (1 of 15 patients) than did the
group that gained weight and had a decrease in serum albumin (8 of 16
patients had 15 complications; Fig. 32.2). The Veterans Administration
(former name for Veterans Affairs \[VA used for both\]) studies also
found that the serum albumin level was one of the most powerful
predictors of perioperative outcome.45 The major complications of TPN
are infection, metabolic abnormalities, and longer duration of ICU
stay.47a The central lines used for TPN require an absolutely aseptic
technique and should not be used as an intravenous access or as a route
for drug administration during anesthesia and surgery. Major metabolic
complications of TPN relate to electrolyte deficiencies, and the
development of hyperosmolar states. Complications of hypertonic dextrose
can develop if the patient has insufficient insulin (diabetes mellitus)
to metabolize the sugar or if insulin resistance occurs (e.g., because
of uremia, burns, or sepsis). A gradual decrease in the infusion rate of
TPN prevents the hypoglycemia that can occur on abrupt discontinuance.
Thus the infusion rate of TPN should be decreased the night before
anesthesia and surgery, or should be continued throughout the operation
at its current rate. The main reason for slowing or discontinuing TPN
before anesthesia is to avoid intraoperative hyperosmolarity secondary
to accidental rapid infusion of the solution or hypoglycemia if the
infusion is discontinued because of high levels of endogenous insulin
and lower levels of glucose present in the usual crystalloid
solutions.45 Hypophosphatemia is a particularly serious complication
that results from the administration of phosphate-free or
phosphate-depleted solutions for hyperalimentation. The low serum
phosphate level causes a shift of the oxygen dissociation curve to the
left. The resulting low 2,3-diphosphoglycerate and adenosine
triphosphatase levels mean that cardiac output must increase for oxygen

Three major classes of hormones---androgens, glucocorticoids, and
mineralocorticoids---are secreted by the adrenal cortex. For each class,
an excess or a deficiency of hormone produces a characteristic clinical
syndrome. The widespread use of steroids can also make the adrenal
cortex unable to respond normally to the demands placed on it by
surgical trauma and subsequent healing. The increase in computed
tomography (CT) abdominal imaging procedures has meant that many adrenal
masses have unfortunately been discovered incidentally. These adrenal
"incidentalomas," as they are termed because they were initially thought
a nuisance discovered by body scans, have proved more serious. As many
as 30% are hormonally active; in one review of 2000 such masses, 82%
were not hormonally active, 5.3% proved to be cortisone-secreting
adenomas, 5.1% were pheochromocytomas, 4.7% were adrenal carcinomas,
2.5% were unsuspected metastatic disease, and 1% were
aldosterone-secreting adenomas. "Incidentalomas" may therefore require
serious pursuit; however, well accepted and utilized guidelines are
absent, but caution should be taken during anesthesia. Controlled
comparisons of the perioperative management of patients who have
disorders of adrenal function are lacking, although steroids are used
more and more commonly, with the results of some controlled trials
available for specific uses. However, a review of the possible
pathophysiologic changes in the adrenal cortex and techniques for their
management should enable physicians to improve the perioperative care of
patients with adrenal abnormalities.

Physiologic Properties of Adrenocortical Hormones Androgens.
Androstenedione and dehydroepiandrosterone, weak androgens arising from
the adrenal cortex, constitute major sources of androgen in women (and
have gained prominence for their abuse among athletes). Excess secretion
of androgen causes masculinization, pseudopuberty, or female
pseudohermaphroditism. With some tumors, androgen is converted to an
estrogenic substance, in which case feminization results. No special
anesthetic evaluation is needed for such patients. Some congenital
enzyme defects that cause androgen abnormalities also result in
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid abnormalities that should be
evaluated preoperatively. Most of these patients are treated with
exogenous glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids and may require
supplementation of these hormones perioperatively. Glucocorticoids. The
principal glucocorticoid, cortisol, is an essential regulator of
carbohydrate, protein, lipid, and nucleic acid metabolism. Cortisol
exerts its biologic effects through a sequence of steps initiated by the
binding of hormone to stereospecific intracellular cytoplasmic
receptors.
This bound complex stimulates nuclear transcription of specific mRNA
molecules. These molecules are then translated to give rise to proteins
that mediate the ultimate effects of hormones. Most cortisol is bound to
corticosterone-binding globulin (CBG, transcortin). The relatively small
amounts of unbound cortisol enter cells to induce actions or to be
metabolized. Conditions that induce changes in the amount of CBG include
liver disease and nephrotic syndrome, both of which result in decreased
circulating levels of CBG, and estrogen administration and pregnancy,
which result in increased CBG production. Total serum cortisol levels
may become elevated or depressed under conditions that alter the amount
of bound cortisol, and yet the unbound, active form of cortisol is
present in normal amounts. The most accurate measure of cortisol
activity is the level of urinary cortisol (i.e., the amount of unbound,
active cortisol filtered by the kidney). The serum half-life of cortisol
is 80 to 110 minutes. However, because cortisol acts through
intracellular receptors, pharmacokinetic data based on serum levels are
not good indicators of cortisol activity. After a single dose of
glucocorticoid, serum glucose is elevated for 12 to 24 hours;
improvement in pulmonary function in patients with bronchial asthma can
still be measured 24 hours after glucocorticoid administration.
Treatment schedules for glucocorticoid replacement are therefore based
not on the measured serum half-life but on the well-documented prolonged
end-organ effect of these steroids. Hospitalized patients requiring
long-term glucocorticoid replacement therapy are usually treated twice
daily, with a slightly higher dose given in the morning than in the
evening to simulate the normal diurnal variation in cortisol levels. For
patients who require parenteral "steroid coverage" during and after
surgery (see later paragraphs), administration of glucocorticoid every 6
to 12 hours is appropriate pending the type of surgery and expected
stress response.47b The relative potencies of glucocorticoids are listed
in Table 32.2. Cortisol is inactivated primarily in the liver and is
excreted as 17-hydroxycorticosteroid. Cortisol is also filtered and
excreted unchanged into urine. The synthetic glucocorticoids vary in
their binding specificity in a dose-related manner. When given in
supraphysiologic doses (\>30 mg/day), cortisol and cortisone bind to
mineralocorticoid receptor sites, and cause salt and water retention and
loss of potassium and hydrogen ions. When these steroids are
administered in maintenance doses of 30 mg/day or less, patients require
a specific mineralocorticoid for electrolyte and volume homeostasis.
Many other steroids do not bind to mineralocorticoid receptors, even at
high doses, and have no mineralocorticoid effect (see Table 32.2).47b
Secretion of glucocorticoids is regulated by pituitary
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH is synthesized from a precursor
molecule (pro-opiomelanocortin) that is metabolized to form an endorphin
(β-lipotropin) and ACTH. Episodic secretion of ACTH has a diurnal rhythm
that is normally greatest during the early morning hours in men and
later in women and is regulated at least in part by light-dark cycles.
Its secretion is stimulated by release of corticotropin-releasing factor
(CRF) from the hypothalamus. (An abnormality in the diurnal rhythm of
corticoid
secretion has been implicated as a cause of so-called jet lag.) Cortisol
and other glucocorticoids exert negative feedback at both the pituitary
and hypothalamic levels to inhibit the secretion of ACTH and CRF. If the
CRF- or ACTH-producing cells are destroyed, the adrenal gland takes more
than 30 days to atrophy to the point at which short-term administration
of exogenous ACTH will cause almost no adrenal responsiveness.48
Mineralocorticoids. Aldosterone, the major mineralocorticoid secreted in
humans, comes from the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex and causes
reabsorption of sodium and secretion of potassium and hydrogen ions,
thereby contributing to electrolyte and volume homeostasis. This action
is most prominent in the distal renal tubule but also occurs in the
salivary and sweat glands. The major regulator of aldosterone secretion
is the renin-angiotensin system. Juxtaglomerular cells in the cuff of
renal arterioles are sensitive to decreased renal perfusion pressure or
volume and, consequently, secrete renin. Renin transforms the precursor
angiotensinogen (from the liver) into angiotensin I, which is further
converted by a converting enzyme, primarily in the lung, to angiotensin
II. Angiotensin II binds to specific receptors to increase
mineralocorticoid secretion, which is also stimulated by an increased
potassium concentration and, to a lesser degree, by ACTH.

Adrenocortical Hormone Excess Glucocorticoid Excess. Glucocorticoid
excess (Cushing syndrome) resulting from either endogenous oversecretion
or long-term treatment with glucocorticoids at higher than physiologic
doses produces a moon-faced plethoric individual with a centripetal
distribution of fat (truncal obesity and skinny extremities), thin skin,
easy bruising, and striae. Skeletal muscle wasting is common, but the
heart and diaphragm are usually spared. A test for this syndrome is to
ask the patient to get up from a chair without using the hands with the
inability to do so indicating proximal
muscle weakness consistent with Cushing syndrome. These patients often
have osteopenia as a result of decreased formation of bone matrix and
impaired absorption of calcium. Fluid retention and hypertension
(because of increases in renin substrate and vascular reactivity caused
by glucocorticoid activity) are common. Such patients may also have
hyperglycemia and even diabetes mellitus from inhibition of peripheral
use of glucose, as well as anti-insulin action and concomitant
stimulation of gluconeogenesis (Table 32.3). The most common cause of
Cushing syndrome is the administration of glucocorticoids for such
conditions as arthritis, asthma, and allergies. In these conditions, the
adrenal glands atrophy and cannot respond to stressful situations (e.g.,
the perioperative period) by secreting more steroid; therefore,
additional glucocorticoids may be required perioperatively (see the
later section "Patients Taking Steroids for Other Reasons"). Spontaneous
Cushing syndrome may be caused by pituitary production of ACTH (65% to
75% of all spontaneous cases), which is usually associated with
pituitary microadenoma, or by nonendocrine ectopic ACTH production
(principally by tumors of the lung, pancreas, or thymus).49 Ten percent
to 20% of cases of spontaneous Cushing syndrome are caused by an
ACTH-independent process, either an adrenal adenoma or carcinoma.49
Special preoperative and preprocedure considerations for patients with
Cushing syndrome include regulating blood glucose control, managing
hypertension, and ensuring intravascular volume and electrolyte
concentrations are
normal. Ectopic ACTH production may cause marked hypokalemic alkalosis.
Treatment with the aldosterone antagonist spironolactone stops the
potassium loss and helps mobilize excess fluid. Because of the incidence
of severe osteopenia and the risk of fractures, meticulous attention
must be paid to positioning of the patient. In addition, glucocorticoids
are lympholytic and immunosuppressive, thus increasing the patient's
susceptibility to infection. The tensile strength of healing wounds
decreases in the presence of glucocorticoids, an effect that is at least
partially reversed by the topical administration of vitamin A. Ten
percent to 15% of patients with Cushing syndrome exhibit adrenal
overproduction of glucocorticoids from an adrenal adenoma or carcinoma.
If either unilateral or bilateral adrenal resection is planned, the
physician should begin administering glucocorticoids at the start of
resection of the tumor. Despite the absence of definitive studies, 100
mg of hydrocortisone every 24 hours intravenously is reasonable. This
amount can be reduced over a period of 3 to 6 days until a maintenance
dose is reached. Beginning on day 3, the surgeons may also give a
mineralocorticoid, 9α-fluorocortisol (0.05-0.1 mg/day). In certain
patients, both steroids may require several adjustments. This therapy
continues if the patient has undergone bilateral resection. For a
patient who has undergone unilateral adrenal resection, therapy is
individualized according to the status of the remaining adrenal gland.
The incidence of pneumothorax in an open adrenal resection approach can
be as high as 20%; the diagnosis of pneumothorax is sought and treatment
is initiated before the wound is closed. The use of the laparoscopic
technique has markedly decreased this complication. Bilateral
adrenalectomy (now performed laparoscopically) in patients with Cushing
syndrome is associated with a perioperative morbidity rate up to 20% and
a perioperative mortality rate up to 3%. This procedure often results in
permanent mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid deficiency.49a Ten
percent of patients with Cushing syndrome who undergo adrenalectomy have
an undiagnosed pituitary tumor. After cortisol concentrations are
decreased by adrenalectomy, the pituitary tumor will likely enlarge.
These pituitary tumors are potentially invasive and may produce large
amounts of ACTH and melanocyte-stimulating hormone, thereby increasing
pigmentation. Approximately 85% of adrenal tumors are discovered
incidentally during screening CT scans. Nonfunctioning adrenal adenomas
are found in patients on autopsy, ranging from 1% to 32% in different
series. Functioning adenomas are generally treated surgically; often,
the contralateral gland resumes functioning after several months.
Frequently, however, the effects of carcinomas are not cured surgically.
In such cases, administration of inhibitors of steroid synthesis, such
as metyrapone or mitotane
(o,p′-DDD\[2,2bis(2-chlorophenyl4-chlorophenyl)-1,1-dichloroethane\]),
may ameliorate some symptoms, as these drugs and specific aldosterone
antagonists may aid in reducing symptoms of ectopic ACTH secretion if
the primary tumor is unresectable. Patients given these adrenal
suppressants are also prescribed long-term glucocorticoid replacement
therapy with the goal of therapy being complete adrenal suppression.
Therefore, these patients should be considered to have suppressed
adrenal function, and glucocorticoid replacement should be increased
perioperatively.
Mineralocorticoid Excess. Excess mineralocorticoid activity (common with
glucocorticoid excess because most glucocorticoids have some
mineralocorticoid properties) leads to potassium depletion, sodium
retention, muscle weakness, hypertension, tetany, polyuria, inability to
concentrate urine, and hypokalemic alkalosis. These symptoms constitute
primary hyperaldosteronism, or Conn syndrome (a cause of low-renin
hypertension because renin secretion is inhibited by the effects of the
high levels of aldosterone). Primary hyperaldosteronism is present in
0.5% to 1% of hypertensive patients who have no other known cause of
hypertension. Primary hyperaldosteronism most often results from
unilateral adenoma, although 25% to 40% of patients have been found to
have bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Intravascular fluid volume,
electrolyte concentrations, and renal function should be restored to
within normal limits preoperatively by administering the aldosterone
antagonist spironolactone. The effects of spironolactone are slow in
onset and increase for 1 to 2 weeks. Frequently, a period of at least 24
hours is required to restore potassium equilibrium as the deficit can be
up to 400 mEq; however, normal serum potassium level does not
necessarily imply correction of a total-body deficit of potassium. In
addition, patients with Conn syndrome have a high incidence of
hypertension and ischemic heart disease; hemodynamic monitoring should
be tailored to the individual patient. A retrospective anecdotal study
indicated that intraoperative hemodynamic status was more stable when
arterial blood pressure and electrolytes were controlled preoperatively
with spironolactone than when other antihypertensive agents were used.
However, the efficacy of optimizing the perioperative status of patients
who have disorders of glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid secretion has
not been clearly defined. Therefore, we have assumed that gradual
restoration of physiologic norms is good medicine and expect that it
would decrease perioperative morbidity and mortality.

Adrenocortical Hormone Deficiency Glucocorticoid Deficiency. Withdrawal
of steroids or suppression of synthesis by steroid therapy is the
leading cause of underproduction of corticosteroids (its management is
discussed in the later section "Patients Taking Steroids for Other
Reasons"). Other causes of adrenocortical insufficiency include the
following: defects in ACTH secretion and destruction of the adrenal
gland by autoimmune disease, tuberculosis, hemorrhage (e.g., Sheehan
syndrome), or cancer; some forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see
previous discussion); and administration of cytotoxic drugs. Primary
adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease) is associated with local
destruction of all zones of the adrenal cortex and results in both
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency if the insufficiency is
bilateral; common symptoms and signs are listed in Table 32.3.
Autoimmune disease is the most common cause of primary (nonexogenous)
bilateral ACTH deficiency in the United States, whereas tuberculosis is
the most common cause worldwide. Tuberculosis is associated not only
with decreased adrenal function, but also large adrenal glands, which
are a common finding in sarcoidosis, histoplasmosis, amyloidosis,
metastatic malignant disease, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and
adrenal hemorrhage. Further, destruction or

injury by trauma, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and other
infections (e.g., cytomegalovirus, mycobacteria, and fungi) is being
recognized more frequently. Autoimmune destruction of the adrenal glands
may be associated with other autoimmune disorders, such as some forms of
type 1 diabetes and Hashimoto thyroiditis. Enzymatic defects in cortisol
synthesis cause glucocorticoid insufficiency, compensatory elevations in
ACTH, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Because adrenal insufficiency
usually develops slowly, such patients are subject to marked
pigmentation (from excess ACTH trying to stimulate an unproductive
adrenal gland) and cardiopenia (secondary to chronic hypotension).
Secondary adrenal insufficiency occurs when ACTH secretion is deficient,
often because of a pituitary or hypothalamic tumor. Treatment of
pituitary tumors by surgery or radiation therapy may result in
hypopituitarism and subsequent adrenal failure. If unstressed,
glucocorticoid-deficient patients usually have no perioperative
problems. However, acute adrenal crisis (addisonian crisis) can occur
when even a minor stress is present (e.g., upper respiratory infection).
Preparation of such a patient for anesthesia and surgery should include
treatment of hypovolemia, hyperkalemia, and hyponatremia. Because these
patients cannot respond to stressful situations, it was traditionally
recommended that they be given a stress dose of glucocorticoids (≈200 mg
hydrocortisone/ day) perioperatively. However, Symreng and colleagues
gave 25 mg of hydrocortisone phosphate intravenously to adults at the
start of the operative procedure, followed by 100 mg intravenously over
the next 24 hours.50 Because using the minimum drug dose that would
produce an appropriate effect is desirable, this latter regimen seems
attractive. Such a regimen has proved to be as successful as a regimen
using maximum doses (≈300 mg hydrocortisone/day). Thus we now recommend
giving the patient's usual daily dose plus 50 to 100 mg of
hydrocortisone before surgical incision and 25 to 50 mg of
hydrocortisone every 8 hours for 24 to 48 hours, depending on the type
and duration of surgery.47b Mineralocorticoid Deficiency.
Hypoaldosteronism, a less common condition, can be congenital, can occur
after unilateral adrenalectomy, or be a consequence of prolonged heparin
administration, long-standing diabetes, or renal failure. Nonsteroidal
inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis may also inhibit renin release and
exacerbate this condition in patients with renal insufficiency. Plasma
renin activity is lower than normal and fails to increase appropriately
in response to sodium restriction or diuretic drugs. Most symptoms are
caused by hyperkalemic acidosis rather than hypovolemia; in fact, some
patients are hypertensive. These patients can have severe hyperkalemia,
hyponatremia, and myocardial conduction defects. These defects can be
treated successfully by administering mineralocorticoids
(9α-fluorocortisol, 0.05-0.1 mg/day) preoperatively. Doses must be
carefully titrated and monitored to avoid an increase in hypertension.

Patients Taking Steroids for Other Reasons Perioperative Stress and the
Need for Corticoid Supplementation. The adrenal responses of normal
patients
to the perioperative period, as well as the responses of patients taking
steroids for other diseases, indicate the following: 1. Perioperative
stress is related to the degree of trauma and the depth of anesthesia.
Deep general or regional anesthesia delays the usual intraoperative
glucocorticoid surge to the postoperative period. 2. A few patients with
suppressed adrenal function will have perioperative cardiovascular
problems if they do not receive supplemental steroids perioperatively.
3. Although a patient who takes steroids on a long-term basis may become
hypotensive perioperatively; glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid
deficiency is seldom the cause. Longer duration and higher home steroid
dose increase the likelihood of deficiency.47b 4. Acute adrenal
insufficiency rarely occurs, but can be life-threatening. 5. Giving
these patients steroid coverage equivalent to 100 mg of hydrocortisone
perioperatively has little risk.47b In a well-controlled study of
glucocorticoid replacement in nonhuman primates, the investigators
clearly defined the life-threatening events that can be associated with
inadequate perioperative corticosteroid replacement.48 In this study,
adrenalectomized primates and sham-operated controls were given
physiologic doses of steroids for 4 months. The animals were then
randomly allocated to groups that received subphysiologic (one-tenth of
the normal cortisol production), physiologic, or supraphysiologic (10
times the normal cortisol production) doses of cortisol for 4 days
preceding abdominal surgery (cholecystectomy). The group given
subphysiologic doses of steroid perioperatively had a significant
increase in postoperative mortality. Death rates for the physiologic and
supraphysiologic replacement groups were the same and did not differ
from the rate for sham-operated controls. Death in the subphysiologic
replacement group was related to severe hypotension associated with a
significant decrease in systemic vascular resistance and a reduced left
ventricular stroke work index. Filling pressures of the heart were
unchanged when compared with those in control animals. No evidence of
hypovolemia or severe congestive heart failure (CHF) was observed.
Despite the low systemic vascular resistance, the animals did not become
tachycardic. All these responses are compatible with the previously
documented interaction of glucocorticoids and catecholamines, and thus
suggest that glucocorticoids mediate catecholamine-induced increases in
cardiac contractility and maintenance of vascular tone. The
investigators used a sensitive measure of wound healing involving
accumulation of hydroxyproline. All treatment groups, including the
group given supraphysiologic doses of glucocorticoids, had the same
capacity for wound healing. Furthermore, perioperative administration of
supraphysiologic doses of corticosteroids produced no adverse metabolic
consequences. This study confirmed long-standing intuitive impressions
concerning patients who had inadequate adrenal function as a result of
either underlying disease or administration of exogenous
steroids---inadequate replacement of corticosteroids can lead to
addisonian crisis and increased mortality, whereas the administration of
supraphysiologic doses of steroids for a short time perioperatively can
be safe. It is clear that inadequate corticosteroid coverage can cause
death, but what is not so clear is what dose of steroid should be
recommended for replacement therapy. Yong and colleagues reviewed the
randomized controlled trials for a Cochrane Systemic Review and reported
only two trials involving 37 patients that met the inclusion criteria.51
These studies reported that supplemental perioperative steroids were not
required during surgery for patients with adrenal insufficiency, but
neither study reported any adverse effects or complications in the
intervention or control groups. The authors concluded that they were
unable to support or refute the use of supplemental perioperative
steroids for patients with adrenal insufficiency during surgery. Because
the risk is low and the benefit is high, physicians should consider
providing supplementation for any patient who has received steroids
within a year.48,50 How can one determine when adrenal responsiveness
has returned to normal? The morning plasma cortisol level does not
reveal whether the adrenal cortex has recovered sufficiently to ensure
that cortisol secretion will increase adequately to meet the demands of
stress. Inducing hypoglycemia with insulin has been advocated as a
sensitive test of pituitary-adrenal competence, but it is impractical
and is probably a more dangerous practice than simply administering
glucocorticoids. If the plasma cortisol concentration is measured during
acute stress, a value of greater than 25 μg/dL assuredly (and a value
\>15 μg/dL probably) indicates normal pituitary-adrenal responsiveness.
In another test of pituitary-adrenal sufficiency, the baseline plasma
cortisol level is determined. Then, 250 μg of synthetic ACTH
(cosyntropin) is given, and plasma cortisol is measured 30 to 60 minutes
later. An increase in plasma cortisol of 6 to 20 μg/dL or more is
normal.52,53 A normal response indicates recovery of pituitary-adrenal
axis function. A lesser response usually indicates pituitary-adrenal
insufficiency, possibly requiring perioperative supplementation with
steroids.53a Under perioperative conditions, the adrenal glands secrete
116 to 185 mg of cortisol daily. Under maximum stress, they may secrete
200 to 500 mg/day. Good correlation exists between the severity and
duration of the operation and the response of the adrenal gland. "Major
surgery" would be represented by procedures such as laparoscopic
colectomy and "minor surgery" by procedures such as herniorrhaphy. In a
study of 20 patients during major surgery, the mean maximal
concentration of cortisol in plasma was 47 μg/dL (range, 22-75 μg/dL).
Values remained higher than 26 μg/dL for a maximum of 72 hours
postoperatively. During minor surgery, the mean maximal concentration of
cortisol in plasma was 28 μg/dL (range, 10-44 μg/dL). Although the
precise amount required has not been established, we usually
intravenously administer the maximum amount of glucocorticoid that the
body manufactures in response to maximal stress (i.e., approximately 200
mg/ day of hydrocortisone).53b For minor surgical procedures, we usually
give hydrocortisone intravenously, 50 to 100 mg/day. Unless infection or
some other perioperative complication develops, we decrease this dose by
approximately 50%/day until the standard home dose is resumed. For major
surgical procedures, we usually give 50 mg every 6 hours to 100 mg every
8 hours. Again unless a complication develops, this is decreased 50%/day
until the standard home dose is resumed.53b
Risks of Supplementation. Rare complications of perioperative steroid
supplementation include aggravation of hypertension, fluid retention,
inducement of stress ulcers, and psychiatric disturbances. Two possible
complications of short-term perioperative supplementation with
glucocorticoids are abnormal wound healing and an increased rate of
infections. This evidence is inconclusive, however, because it relates
to short-term glucocorticoid administration and not to long-term
administration of glucocorticoids with increased doses at times of
stress. In contrast to a deleterious effect of perioperative
glucocorticoid administration on wound healing in rats, a study
involving primates suggested that large doses of glucocorticoids,
administered perioperatively, do not impair sensitive measures of wound
healing.48 An overall assessment of these results suggests that
short-term perioperative supplementation with steroids has a small but
definite deleterious effect on wound healing that is perhaps partially
reversed by topical administration of vitamin A. Information on the risk
of infection from perioperative glucocorticoid supplementation is also
unclear as there are no controlled trials addressing these effects. In
many studies of long-term use by patients and supplementation, no
increased risk of serious infections was reported with longterm use of
steroids alone. Data indicate that the risk of infection in a patient
taking steroids on a long-term basis is real, but whether perioperative
supplementation with steroids increases that risk is not clear.

Adrenal Cortex Function in Older Adults Production of androgens by the
adrenal gland progressively decreases with age; this change has no known
implications for anesthesia. Plasma levels of cortisol are unaffected by
increasing age. Levels of CBG are also unaffected by age, a finding
suggesting that a normal fraction of free cortisol (1%-5%) is present in
older patients. Older patients have a progressively impaired ability to
metabolize and excrete glucocorticoids. In normal individuals, the
quantity of 17-hydroxycorticosteroids excreted is reduced by half by the
seventh decade. This decreased excretion undoubtedly reflects the
reduced renal function that occurs with aging. When excretion of
cortisol metabolites is expressed as a function of creatinine clearance,
the age difference disappears. Further reductions in cortisol clearance
may reflect impaired hepatic metabolism of circulating cortisol. The
rate of secretion of cortisol is 30% slower in older adults. This
reduced secretion may be an appropriate compensatory mechanism for
maintaining a normal cortisol level in the presence of decreased hepatic
and renal clearance of cortisol. The reduced cortisol production can be
overcome during periods of stress, and even extremely old patients
(\>100 years old) display an entirely normal adrenal response to the
administration of ACTH and to stresses such as hypoglycemia. Both
underproduction and overproduction of glucocorticoids are generally
considered diseases of younger individuals. The highest incidence of
Cushing disease of either pituitary or adrenal origin occurs during the
third decade of life. The most common cause of spontaneous Cushing
disease is benign pituitary adenoma. However, in patients older than 60
years in whom Cushing disease develops, the most likely cause is adrenal
carcinoma or ectopic ACTH

production from tumors usually located in the lung, pancreas, or thymus.

ADRENAL MEDULLARY SYMPATHETIC HORMONE EXCESS: PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA Less than
0.1% of all cases of hypertension are caused by pheochromocytomas, or
catecholamine-producing tumors derived from chromaffin tissue.54
Nevertheless, these tumors are clearly important to the anesthesiologist
as previously 25% to 50% of hospital deaths in patients with
pheochromocytoma occurred during induction of anesthesia or during
operative procedures for other causes.55 This high mortality has been
reduced with the improvements in anesthesia management during our
current era.55a Although usually found in the adrenal medulla, these
vascular tumors can occur anywhere (referred to as paragangliomas), with
a proportion of up to 20%.55b Malignant spread, which occurs in less
than 15% of pheochromocytomas, usually proceeds to venous and lymphatic
channels with a predisposition for the liver. This tumor is occasionally
familial or part of the multiglandular-neoplastic syndrome known as
multiple endocrine adenoma type IIa or type IIb, and is manifested as an
autosomal dominant trait. Type IIa consists of medullary carcinoma of
the thyroid, parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia, and pheochromocytoma.
What used to be called type IIb is now often called pheochromocytoma in
association with phakomatoses such as von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis and von Hippel--Lindau disease with cerebellar
hemangioblastoma. Frequently, bilateral tumors are found in the familial
form. Localization of tumors can be achieved by MRI or CT,
metaiodobenzylguanidine nuclear scanning, ultrasonography, or
intravenous pyelography (in decreasing order of combined sensitivity and
specificity). Symptoms and signs that may be solicited before surgery or
procedures and are suggestive of pheochromocytoma are as follows:
excessive sweating; headache; hypertension; orthostatic hypotension;
previous hypertensive or arrhythmic response to induction of anesthesia
or to abdominal examination; paroxysmal attacks of sweating, headache,
tachycardia, and hypertension; glucose intolerance; polycythemia; weight
loss; and psychological abnormalities. In fact, the occurrence of
combined symptoms of paroxysmal headache, sweating, and hypertension is
probably a more sensitive and specific indicator than any one
biochemical test for pheochromocytoma (Table 32.4). The value of
preoperative and preprocedure adrenergic receptor blocking drugs
probably justifies their use as these drugs may reduce the perioperative
complications of hypertensive crisis, the wide arterial blood pressure
fluctuations during tumor manipulation (especially until venous drainage
is obliterated), and the myocardial dysfunction. Mortality is decreased
with resection of pheochromocytoma (from 40% to 60% to the current 0% to
6%) when adrenergic receptor blockade is introduced as preoperative and
preprocedure preparatory therapy for such patients.56-60 α-Adrenergic
receptor blockade with prazosin or phenoxybenzamine restores
intravascular plasma volume by counteracting the vasoconstrictive
effects of high levels of catecholamines. This reexpansion of
intravascular fluid volume is often followed by a decrease in
hematocrit. Because some patients may be very sensitive to the effects
of phenoxybenzamine, this drug should initially be
given in doses of 20 to 30 mg/70 kg orally once or twice a day. Most
patients usually require 60 to 250 mg/day. The Endocrine Society Task
Force guidelines from 2014 recommend α-adrenergic receptor blockade for
all patients with active tumors.60a The efficacy of therapy should be
judged by the reduction in symptoms and stabilization of arterial blood
pressure. For patients who have carbohydrate intolerance because of
inhibition of insulin release mediated by α-adrenergic receptor
stimulation, α-adrenergic receptor blockade may reduce fasting blood
glucose levels. For patients who exhibit ST-T changes on the ECG,
longterm preoperative and preprocedure α-adrenergic receptor blockade
(1-6 months) has produced ECG and clinical resolution of
catecholamine-induced myocarditis.56,57,59-63 β-Adrenergic receptor
blockade with propranolol is suggested for patients who have persistent
arrhythmias or tachycardia,56,57,59-63 the reason being that these
conditions can be precipitated or aggravated by α-adrenergic receptor
blockade. It is important to remember that β-adrenergic receptor
blockade should not be used without concurrent α-adrenergic receptor
blockade lest the vasoconstrictive effects of the latter go unopposed
and thereby increasing the risk of malignant hypertension. The optimal
duration of preoperative therapy with α-adrenergic receptor blockade has
not been well studied. The Endocrine Society Task Force guidelines from
2014 recommend α-adrenergic receptor blockade at least 7 to 14 days
prior to surgery; however, most centers report a preoperative treatment
duration of 2 to 6 weeks.19 Most patients will require 10 to 14 days, as
judged by the time needed to stabilize arterial blood pressure and
ameliorate symptoms. The Endocrine Society Task Force guidelines further
recommended a high sodium diet and fluid intake to reverse the
catecholamine-induced volume contraction.63a Because the tumor spreads
slowly, little is lost by waiting until medical therapy has optimized
the patient's preoperative condition. The following criteria are
reasonable for assessing the adequacy of treatment: 1. No in-hospital
arterial blood pressure reading higher than 165/90 mm Hg should be
evident for 48 hours preoperatively. 2. Orthostatic hypotension is
acceptable as long as arterial blood pressure when the patient is
standing is not less than 80/45 mm Hg.

3.  The ECG should be free of ST-T changes that are not permanent.
4.  No more than one premature ventricular contraction (PVC) should
    occur every 5 minutes. Other drugs, including prazosin, calcium
    channel blocking drugs, clonidine, dexmedetomidine, and magnesium,
    have also been used to achieve suitable degrees of α-adrenergic
    blockade preoperatively. Multiple case series have confirmed the
    clinical utility of this approach in adults before tumor excision,
    including in a hemodynamic catecholamine crisis.64 Magnesium therapy
    has shown efficacy for the resection of pheochromocytoma or
    paraganglioma during pregnancy. The dosing of magnesium for the
    management of pheochromocytoma has been reviewed elsewhere.65 The
    key clinical components of ideal patient care include optimal
    preoperative preparation, slow and controlled induction of
    anesthesia, and good communication among members of the
    perioperative team. Virtually all anesthetic drugs and techniques
    (including isoflurane, sevoflurane, sufentanil, remifentanil,
    fentanyl, and regional anesthesia) have been used with success,
    although all drugs studied were associated with a high rate of
    transient intraoperative arrhythmias.59 Because of ease of use, the
    preference is to give phenylephrine for hypotension and
    nitroprusside or nicardipine for hypertension. Phentolamine has too
    long an onset and duration of action. Painful or stressful events
    such as intubation often cause an exaggerated stress response in
    less than perfectly anesthetized patients who have pheochromocytoma.
    This response is caused by release of catecholamines from nerve
    endings that are "loaded" by the reuptake process. Such stresses may
    result in catecholamine levels of 200 to 2000 picograms (pg)/mL in
    normal patients. For a patient with pheochromocytoma, even simple
    stress can lead to blood catecholamine levels of ten times normal.
    However, infarction of a tumor, with release of products onto
    peritoneal surfaces, or surgical pressure causing release of
    products, can result in blood levels of 200,000 to 1,000,000
    pg/mL---a situation that should be anticipated and avoided (if
    possible ask for a stay of surgery to increase vasodilator
    infusion). Once the venous supply is secured and if intravascular
    volume is normal, normal arterial blood pressure usually results.
    However,

some patients may become hypotensive and occasionally require
catecholamine infusions. Vasopressin has also been used for hemodynamic
rescue in catecholamine-resistant vasoplegic shock after resection of a
massive pheochromocytoma.66 On rare occasion, patients remain
hypertensive intraoperatively. Postoperatively, approximately 50% of
patients remain hypertensive for 1 to 3 days and initially have markedly
increased but declining plasma catecholamine levels---at which time all
but 25% will become normotensive. Other family members should be advised
to inform their future anesthesiologist about the potential for such
familial disease.

HYPOFUNCTION OR ABERRATION IN FUNCTION OF THE SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
(DYSAUTONOMIA) Disorders of the sympathetic nervous system include
ShyDrager syndrome, Riley-Day syndrome, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Gill
familial dysautonomia, diabetic dysautonomia, and the dysautonomia of
spinal cord transection. Although individuals can function well without
an adrenal medulla, a deficient peripheral sympathetic nervous system
occurring late in life poses major problems; nevertheless, perioperative
sympathectomy or its equivalent is often recommended.67-73 A primary
function of the sympathetic nervous system appears to be regulation of
arterial blood pressure and intravascular fluid volume during changing
of body position. Common features of all the syndromes with hypofunction
of the sympathetic nervous system are orthostatic hypotension and
decreased beat-to-beat variability in heart rate. These conditions can
be caused by deficient intravascular volume, deficient baroreceptor
function (as also occurs in carotid artery disease74), abnormalities in
CNS function (as in Wernicke or Shy-Drager syndrome), deficient neuronal
stores of norepinephrine (as in idiopathic orthostatic hypotension75 and
diabetes), or deficient release of norepinephrine (as in traumatic
spinal cord injury76). These patients may have a compensatory
upregulation of available adrenergic receptors causing an exaggerated
response to sympathomimetic drugs. In addition to other abnormalities,
such as retention of urine or feces and deficient heat exchange,
hypofunction of the sympathetic nervous system is often accompanied by
renal amyloidosis. Thus electrolyte and intravascular fluid volume
status should be assessed preoperatively. Because many of these patients
have cardiac abnormalities, cardiac function and intravascular volume
status may require invasive assessment with echocardiography, central
venous catheter, or a pulmonary artery catheter per the treating
physician's discretion. Because the functioning of the sympathetic
nervous system is not predictable in these patients, slow and controlled
induction of anesthesia and treatment of sympathetic excess or
deficiency should be initiated through titratable direct-acting
vasodilators (nicardipine/nitroprusside), vasoconstrictors
(phenylephrine/norepinephrine), chronotropes (isoproterenol), or
negative chronotropes (esmolol). A 20% perioperative mortality rate for
2600 patients after spinal cord transection has been reported, thus
indicating that such patients are difficult to manage and deserve
particularly close attention.

After reviewing 300 patients with spinal cord injuries, Kendrick and
coworkers concluded that autonomic hyperreflexia syndrome does not
develop if the lesion is below spinal dermatome T7.77 If the lesion is
above that level (splanchnic outflow), 60% to 70% of patients experience
extreme vascular instability. The trigger to this instability, a mass
reflex involving noradrenergic release and motor hypertonus, can be a
cutaneous, proprioceptive, or visceral stimulus (a full bladder is a
common initiator). The sensation enters the spinal cord and causes a
spinal reflex, which in normal persons is inhibited from above. Sudden
increases in arterial blood pressure are sensed in the pressure
receptors of the aorta and carotid sinus. The resulting vagal
hyperactivity produces bradycardia, ventricular ectopia, or various
degrees of heart block. Reflex vasodilation may occur above the level of
the lesion and result in flushing of the head and neck. In the acute
injury period, modest therapeutic hypothermia may provide benefit but
many note that further large randomized trials are needed; the
anesthesiologist must be vigilant to avoid hyperthermia and maintain
normothermia---hypothermia during procedures.77a Depending on the length
of time since spinal cord transection, other abnormalities may occur. In
the short term (i.e., \<3 weeks from the time of spinal injury),
retention of urine and feces is common and, through elevation of the
diaphragm, may affect respiration. Hyperesthesia is present above the
lesion; reflexes and flaccid paralysis are present below the lesion. The
intermediate period (3 days to 6 months) is marked by a hyperkalemic
response to depolarizing drugs.78 The chronic phase is characterized by
return of muscle tone, Babinski sign, and, frequently, the occurrence of
hyperreflexia syndromes (e.g., mass reflex \[see earlier\]). Thus in
addition to meticulous attention to perioperative intravascular volume
and electrolyte status, the anesthesiologist should know---by history
taking, physical examination, and laboratory data---the status of the
patient's myocardial conduction (as revealed by the ECG), the status of
renal functioning (by noting the ratio of creatinine to blood urea
nitrogen \[BUN\]), and the condition of the respiratory muscles (by
determining the ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 second to forced
vital capacity). The anesthesiologist may also obtain a chest radiograph
if atelectasis or pneumonia is suspected on the basis of history taking
or the physical examination. Temperature control, the presence of bone
fractures or decubitus ulcers, and normal functioning of the urination
and defecation systems must be assessed.

THYROID DYSFUNCTION The major thyroid hormones are thyroxine (T4), a
prohormone product of the thyroid gland, and the more potent
3,5,3-triiodothyronine (T3), a product of both the thyroid and
extrathyroidal enzymatic deiodination of T4. Under normal circumstances,
approximately 85% of T3 is produced outside the thyroid gland.
Production of thyroid secretions is maintained by secretion of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in the pituitary, which in turn is
regulated by secretion of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) in the
hypothalamus. Secretion of TSH and TRH appears to be negatively
regulated by T4 and T3. Many investigators believe that all effects of
thyroid hormones are mediated by T3 and that T4 functions only as a
prohormone.
Because T3 has greater biologic effect than does T4, one would expect
the diagnosis of thyroid disorders to be based on levels of T3. However,
this is not usually the case. The diagnosis of thyroid disease is
confirmed by one of several biochemical measurements: levels of free T4
or total serum concentrations of T4 and the "free T4 estimate." This
estimate is obtained by multiplying total T4 (free and bound) by the
thyroid-binding ratio (formerly called resin T3 uptake) (Table 32.5).
Free T4 can be accurately measured by many laboratories, this direct
measurement of free T4 obviates the need to account for changes in
binding protein synthesis and affinity caused by other conditions. The
T3-binding ratio measures the extra quantity of serum protein-binding
sites. This measurement is necessary because thyroxine-binding globulin
(TBG) levels are abnormally high during pregnancy, hepatic disease, and
estrogen therapy (all of which would elevate the total T4 level; Box
32.2). Reliable interpretation of measurements of the total hormone
concentration in serum necessitates data on the percentage of bound
hormone. The thyroid hormone--binding ratio test provides this
information. In this test, iodine-labeled T3 is added to a patient's
serum and is allowed to reach an equilibrium binding state. A resin is
then added that binds the remaining radioactive T3. Resin uptake is
greater if the patient has fewer TBG-binding sites. In normal patients,
resin T3 uptake (the thyroid hormone--binding ratio) is 25% to 35%. When
serum TBG is elevated, the thyroid hormone--binding ratio is diminished
(see Table 32.5). When serum TBG is diminished, as in nephrotic
syndrome, in conditions in which glucocorticoids are increased, or in
chronic liver disease, the thyroid hormone--binding ratio is increased.
The free T4 estimate and the free T3 estimate are frequently used as
measures of a patient's serum T4 and T3 hormone concentrations,
respectively. To obtain these estimates, the concentration of total
serum T4 or total serum T3 is multiplied by the measured thyroid
hormone--binding ratio. Values of these two indices are normal in the
event of a primary alteration in binding but not with an alteration in
secretion of thyroid hormone. Hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed by
measuring levels of TSH after the administration of TRH. Although
administering TRH normally increases TSH levels in blood, even a small
increase in the T4 or T3 level in blood abolishes this response. Thus a
subnormal or absent serum TSH response to TRH is a very sensitive
indicator of hyperthyroidism. In one group of disorders involving
hyperthyroidism, serum TSH levels are elevated in the presence of
elevated levels of free thyroid hormone. Measurement of the α-subunit of
TSH has been helpful in identifying the rare patients who have a
pituitary neoplasm and who usually have increased α-subunit
concentrations. Some patients are clinically euthyroid in the presence
of elevated levels of total T4 in serum. Certain drugs, notably
propranolol, glucocorticoids, and amiodarone, block the conversion of T4
to T3 and thereby elevate T4 levels. Severe illness also slows this
conversion, termed "sick thyroid" in a critical-illness setting. Levels
of TSH are often high in situations in which the rate of conversion is
decreased. In hyperthyroidism, cardiac function and responses to stress
are abnormal; return of normal cardiac function parallels the return of
TSH levels to normal.

Hyperthyroidism Although hyperthyroidism is usually caused by the
multinodular diffuse enlargement in Graves disease (also associated with
disorders of the skin or eyes, or both), it can also occur with
pregnancy, thyroiditis, thyroid adenoma, choriocarcinoma, or
TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma. Five percent of women have thyrotoxic
effects 3 to 6 months postpartum and tend to have recurrences with
subsequent pregnancies. Major manifestations of hyperthyroidism are
weight loss, diarrhea, warm and moist skin, weakness of large muscle
groups, menstrual abnormalities, osteopenia, nervousness, jitteriness,
intolerance to heat, tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, mitral valve
prolapse, and heart failure. When the thyroid is functioning abnormally,
the cardiovascular system is most at risk. When diarrhea is severe, the
associated dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities should be corrected
preoperatively. Mild anemia, thrombocytopenia, increased serum alkaline
phosphatase, hypercalcemia, muscle wasting, and bone loss frequently
occur in
hyperthyroidism. Muscle disease usually involves the proximal large
muscle groups; it has not been reported to cause respiratory muscle
paralysis. In the apathetic form of hyperthyroidism (seen most commonly
in persons \>60 years old), cardiac effects predominate and include
tachycardia, irregular heart rhythm, atrial fibrillation (in 10%), heart
failure, and occasionally, papillary muscle dysfunction. Although
β-adrenergic receptor blockade can control the heart rate, its use is
challenging in the setting of heart failure. However, a decreasing heart
rate may improve heartpumping function. Thus hyperthyroid patients who
have fast ventricular rates and in heart failure, requiring emergency
surgery, can be safely given short-acting β-blockers guided by clinical
response. If slowing the heart rate with a small dose of esmolol (50
μg/kg) does not aggravate the heart failure, the physician should
administer more esmolol, and titrate to effect. Antithyroid medications
include propylthiouracil and methimazole, both of which decrease the
synthesis of T4 and may enhance remission by reducing TSH receptor
antibody levels (the primary pathologic mechanism in Graves disease).
Propylthiouracil also decreases the conversion of T4 to the more potent
T3. However, the literature indicates a trend toward preoperative
preparation with propranolol and iodides alone.79 This approach is
quicker (i.e., 7-14 days vs. 2-6 weeks); it shrinks the thyroid gland,
as does the more traditional approach; it decreases conversion of the
prohormone T4 into the more potent T3; and it treats symptoms but may
not correct abnormalities in left ventricular function. Regardless of
the approach, antithyroid drugs should be administered on a long-term
basis and on the morning of the surgical procedure. If emergency surgery
is necessary before the euthyroid state is achieved, if subclinical
hyperthyroidism progresses without adequate treatment, or if
hyperthyroidism is out of control intraoperatively, intravenous
administration of esmolol, 50 to 500 μ/kg, could be titrated to restore
a normal heart rate (assuming the absence of heart failure). In
addition, intravascular fluid volume and electrolyte balance should be
restored. However, administering propranolol or esmolol does not always
prevent "thyroid storm." No specific anesthetic drug is preferred for
surgical patients who have hyperthyroidism. A patient with a large
goiter and an obstructed airway can be managed in the same way as any
other patient with a problematic airway. In this type of case, reviewing
CT scans of the neck preoperatively may provide valuable information
regarding the extent of compression. Maintenance of anesthesia usually
presents little difficulty. Postoperatively, extubation of the trachea
should be performed under optimal circumstances for reintubation in the
event that tracheomalacia (the tracheal rings have been weakened and the
trachea collapses) developed. Of the many possible postoperative
complications including: nerve injury, bleeding, metabolic
abnormalities, and thyroid storm (discussed in the next section);
bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve trauma and hypocalcemic tetany are
the most feared. Bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve injury (secondary
to trauma or edema) causes stridor and laryngeal obstruction as a result
of unopposed adduction of the vocal cords and closure of the glottic
aperture. Immediate endotracheal intubation is required, usually
followed by tracheostomy to ensure an adequate airway. Fortunately,

Lahey Clinic records indicate that this rare complication occurred only
once in more than 30,000 thyroid operations. Unilateral recurrent nerve
injury often goes unnoticed because of compensatory overadduction of the
uninvolved cord. However, we often test vocal cord function before and
after this operation by asking the patient to say "e" or "moon."
Unilateral nerve injury is characterized by hoarseness, whereas aphonia
characterizes bilateral nerve injury. Selective injury to the adductor
fibers of both recurrent laryngeal nerves leaves the abductor muscles
relatively unopposed, and pulmonary aspiration is a risk. Selective
injury to the abductor fibers leaves the adductor muscles relatively
unopposed, and airway obstruction can occur. The intimate involvement of
the parathyroid gland with the thyroid gland can result in inadvertent
hypocalcemia during surgery for thyroid disease. Complications related
to hypocalcemia are discussed in the later section on this disorder.
Because postoperative hematoma can compromise the airway, neck and wound
dressings are placed in a crossing fashion (rather than vertically or
horizontally) and should be examined for evidence of bleeding before a
patient is discharged from the recovery room.

Thyroid Storm Thyroid storm is the name for the clinical diagnosis of a
life-threatening illness in a patient whose hyperthyroidism has been
severely exacerbated by illness or surgery. Thyroid storm is
characterized by hyperthermia or pyrexia, tachycardia, and striking
alterations in consciousness. Its clinical appearance is similar to
malignant hyperthermia, pheochromocytoma, and neuroleptic malignant
syndrome, further complicating the differential.79a No laboratory tests
are diagnostic of thyroid storm, and the precipitating (nonthyroidal)
cause is the major determinant of survival. Therapy can include blocking
the synthesis of thyroid hormones by administering antithyroid drugs and
the release of preformed hormone with iodine. Blocking the sympathetic
nervous system symptoms with reserpine, α- and β-receptor antagonists,
or α2 drugs may be exceedingly hazardous and requires skillful
management with constant monitoring of the critically ill patient.
Thyroid dysfunction, either hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, develops
in more than 10% of patients treated with the antiarrhythmic agent
amiodarone.80 Approximately 35% of the drug's weight is iodine, and a
200-mg tablet releases approximately 20 times the optimal daily dose of
iodine. This iodine can lead to reduced synthesis of T4 or increased
synthesis. In addition, amiodarone inhibits the conversion of T4 to the
more potent T3. These patients receiving amiodarone are in need of
special attention preoperatively and intraoperatively, not just because
of the arrhythmia that led to such therapy, but to ensure that no
perioperative dysfunction or surprises result from unsuspected thyroid
hyperfunction or hypofunction.81 Hypothyroidism Hypothyroidism is a
common disease that has been detected in 5% of a large population in
Great Britain, in 3% to 6% of a healthy older population in
Massachusetts, in 4.5% of a medical clinic population in Switzerland,
and in 8.5% of a
large Turkish population presenting to an anesthesiology preoperative
clinic.81a The apathy and lethargy that often accompany hypothyroidism
frequently delay its diagnosis, thus the perioperative period may be the
first opportunity to spot many such hypothyroid patients. However,
hypothyroidism is usually subclinical, serum concentrations of thyroid
hormones are in the normal range, and only serum TSH levels are
elevated. The normal range of TSH is 0.3 to 4.5 milliunits/L, and TSH
values of 5 to 15 milliunits/L are characteristic of this entity. In
such cases, hypothyroidism may have little or no perioperative
significance. However, a retrospective study of 59 mildly hypothyroid
patients found that more hypothyroid patients than control subjects
required prolonged postoperative intubation (9 of 59 vs. 4 of 59), had
significant electrolyte imbalances (3 of 59 vs. 1 of 59), and bleeding
complications (4 of 59 vs. 0 of 59).82 Because only a few charts were
examined, these differences did not reach statistical significance. In
another study, overt hypothyroidism later developed in a high percentage
of patients with a history of subclinical hypothyroidism.83,84 Overt
hypothyroidism is associated with slow mental functioning, slow
movement, slow reflexes, dry skin, arthralgias, carpal tunnel syndrome,
periorbital edema, intolerance to cold, depression of the ventilatory
responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia, impaired clearance of free water
with or without hyponatremia, slow gastric emptying, sleep apnea,85 and
bradycardia. In extreme cases, cardiomegaly, heart failure, pericardial
and pleural effusions can develop, often presenting as orthopnea,
dyspnea, or general fatigue. Hypothyroidism is often associated with
amyloidosis, which may produce an enlarged tongue, cardiac conduction
abnormalities, and renal disease. Hypothyroidism decreases the
anesthetic requirement slightly. The tongue may be enlarged in a
hypothyroid patient even in the absence of amyloidosis, and such
enlargement may hamper endotracheal intubation. An increasing TSH level
is the most sensitive indicator of failing thyroid function. Ideal
preoperative and preprocedure management of hypothyroidism consists of
restoring normal thyroid status: the physicians should consider
administering the normal dose of levothyroxine the morning of the
surgical procedure, even though these drugs have long half-lives (1.4-10
days). Reduced GI absorption of levothyroxine may occur with the
coadministration of cholestyramine or aluminum hydroxide, iron, a
high-bran meal, or sucralfate or colestipol. For patients in myxedema
coma who require emergency surgery, liothyronine (T3 hormone) can be
given intravenously (with fear of precipitating myocardial ischemia,
however) while supportive therapy is undertaken to restore normal
intravascular fluid volume, body temperature, cardiac function,
respiratory function, and electrolyte balance.85a In hypothyroidism,
respiratory control mechanisms and renal fluid balance do not function
normally, however, the response to hypoxia and hypercapnia, and
clearance of free water normalize with thyroid replacement therapy. Drug
metabolism is anecdotally reported to be slowed, and awakening times
from sedatives are reported to be prolonged by hypothyroidism. However,
few formal studies, and none in humans, of the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of sedatives or anesthetic drugs in this population
have been published. These concerns disappear when thyroid function
is normalized preoperatively. Addison disease (with its relative steroid
deficiency) is more common in hypothyroidism, and some endocrinologists
routinely treat patients with noniatrogenic hypothyroidism with stress
doses of steroids perioperatively because both conditions are commonly
caused by autoimmune responses. The possibility that this steroid
deficiency exists should be considered if the patient becomes
hypotensive perioperatively. Body heat mechanisms are inadequate in
hypothyroid patients, so temperature should be monitored and maintained,
especially in patients requiring emergency surgery. Because of an
increased incidence of myasthenia gravis in hypothyroid patients, a
peripheral nerve stimulator is used to guide judicious administration of
muscle relaxants.

Thyroid Nodules and Carcinoma More than 90% of thyroid nodules are
benign, yet identifying malignancy in a solitary thyroid nodule is a
difficult and important procedure. Male patients and patients with
previous radiation therapy to the head and neck have an increased
likelihood of malignant disease in their nodules. Often, needle biopsy
and scanning are sufficient for the diagnosis, but occasionally
excisional biopsy is needed. Papillary carcinoma accounts for more than
70% of all thyroid carcinomas. Simple excision of lymph node metastases
appears to be as efficacious as radical neck procedures for the
patient's survival. Follicular carcinoma, which accounts for
approximately 15% of thyroid carcinomas, is more aggressive, and has a
less favorable prognosis. Medullary carcinoma, the most aggressive form
of thyroid carcinoma, is associated with a familial occurrence of
pheochromocytoma, as are parathyroid adenomas. For this reason, a
history should be obtained from patients with a surgical scar in the
thyroid region so that the possibility of occult pheochromocytoma can be
assessed and excluded.

DISORDERS OF CALCIUM METABOLISM The three substances that regulate serum
concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium are parathyroid
hormone (parathyrin, PTH), calcitonin, and vitamin D, which act on bone,
kidney, gut, and their own receptors. Calcium excess in blood is caused
by either malignant disease or hyperparathyroidism in more than 90% of
patients.86 PTH stimulates bone resorption, inhibits renal excretion of
calcium, and increases conversion to active vitamin D, three conditions
that lead to hypercalcemia. Calcitonin can be considered an antagonist
to PTH. Through its metabolites, vitamin D aids in the absorption of
calcium, phosphate, and magnesium from the gut and facilitates the bone
resorptive effects of PTH. Secretion of PTH is modulated through the
calcium-sensing receptor on the cell surface of parathyroid cells. An
increase in ionized calcium stimulates this receptor and thus causes a
decrease in PTH secretion. Recognition of this effect has led to
reevaluation of the therapy for hyperparathyroidism inasmuch as a drug
upregulating this receptor's sensitivity reduces PTH levels.87

Hyperparathyroidism and Hypercalcemia Primary hyperparathyroidism occurs
in approximately 0.1% of the population, most commonly begins in the
third to fifth decades of life, and occurs two to three times more
frequently in women than in men. Primary hyperparathyroidism usually
results from enlargement of a single gland, commonly an adenoma and very
rarely a carcinoma. Hypercalcemia almost always develops. Calcium is the
chief mineral component of the body; it provides structure to the
skeleton and performs key roles in neural transmission, intracellular
signaling, blood coagulation, and neuromuscular functioning. Ninety-nine
percent of the 1000 g of calcium present in the average human body is
stored in the bone mineral reservoir. Fifty percent to 60% is bound to
plasma proteins or is complexed with phosphate or citrate. The normal
total serum calcium level is 8.6 to 10.4 mg/dL, as measured in most
laboratories; though this value depends on the albumin level, noting a
decline of 0.8 mg/dL for each 1 g/dL drop in albumin. Binding of calcium
to albumin depends on pH: binding decreases with acidic pH and increases
with alkaline pH. Serum calcium, not ionized calcium, decreases with
reductions in albumin levels. Although ionized calcium is the clinically
significant fraction, the cost and technical difficulties of stabilizing
the electrodes used for measurement have limited the available assays.
Nevertheless, PTH and vitamin D3 work to keep the level stable within
0.1 mg/dL in any individual. Many of the prominent symptoms of
hyperparathyroidism are a result of the hypercalcemia that accompanies
it. Regardless of the cause, hypercalcemia can produce any of a number
of symptoms, the most prominent of which involve the renal, skeletal,
neuromuscular, and GI system, including anorexia, vomiting,
constipation, polyuria, polydipsia, lethargy, confusion, renal calculi,
pancreatitis, bone pain, and psychiatric abnormalities. Free
intracellular calcium initiates or regulates muscle contraction, release
of neurotransmitters, secretion of hormones, enzyme action, and energy
metabolism. Nephrolithiasis occurs in 60% to 70% of patients with
hyperparathyroidism. Sustained hypercalcemia can result in tubular and
glomerular disorders, including proximal (type II) renal tubular
acidosis. Polyuria and polydipsia are common complaints. Skeletal
disorders related to hyperparathyroidism are osteitis fibrosa cystica,
simple diffuse osteopenia, and osteoporosis. The rate of bone turnover
is five times higher in patients with hyperparathyroidism than in normal
controls. Patients may have a history of frequent fractures or may
complain of bone pain, especially in the anterior margin of the tibia.
Because free intracellular calcium initiates or regulates muscle
contraction, neurotransmitter signaling, hormone secretion, enzyme
action, and energy metabolism, abnormalities in these end organs are
often symptoms of hyperparathyroidism. Patients may experience profound
muscle weakness, especially in proximal muscle groups, as well as muscle
atrophy. Depression, psychomotor retardation, and memory impairment may
occur. Lethargy and confusion are frequent complaints. Peptic ulcer
disease is more common in these patients than in the rest of the
population. Production of gastrin and gastric acid is increased.
Anorexia, vomiting, and constipation may also be present. Approximately
one third of all hypercalcemic patients are hypertensive, but the
hypertension usually resolves with successful treatment of the primary
disease. Neither

hypertension nor minimally invasive surgery seems to alter the
perioperative risk associated with surgery in such patients in
comparison with the usual hypertensive patients.88,89 Even octogenarians
with asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism can be operated on without
mortality and with morbidity no different from that in younger
individuals, thus encouraging the use of parathyroidectomy as preventive
therapy.90 Long-standing hypercalcemia can lead to calcifications in the
myocardium, blood vessels, brain, and kidneys. Cerebral calcifications
may cause seizures, whereas renal calcifications lead to polyuria that
is unresponsive to vasopressin.90 The most useful confirmatory test for
hyperparathyroidism is radioimmunoassay for PTH. In fact, two changes
have radically reduced anesthesia involvement in the care of patients
with primary hyperparathyroidism. One change, the use of the
calcimimetic drug class which modulates the calcium-sensitive PTH cell
receptor and thereby decreases calcium levels, has been emphasized in
older individuals. The other change is use of minimally invasive
approaches after imaging procedures with just local anesthesia or a
cervical plexus block---as with thyroidectomy.91,92 Most surgeons now
performing minimally invasive parathyroid removal monitor PTH levels
intraoperatively to determine whether the causative adenoma has been
resected. The baseline PTH level should be determined before induction
of anesthesia because even monitored anesthesia care increases PTH
levels.93 In hyperparathyroid patients, hormone levels are abnormal for
a given level of calcium. The level of inorganic phosphorus in serum is
usually low, but it may be within normal limits. Alkaline phosphatase
levels are elevated if considerable skeletal involvement is present.
Glucocorticoid administration reduces the level of calcium in blood in
many other conditions that cause hypercalcemia, but not usually in
primary hyperparathyroidism. In sarcoidosis, multiple myeloma, vitamin D
intoxication, and some malignant diseases, all of which can cause
hypercalcemia, administration of glucocorticoids may lower serum calcium
levels through an effect on GI absorption. This effect occurs to a
lesser degree in primary hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalcemia may also
occur as a consequence of secondary hyperparathyroidism in patients who
have chronic renal disease. When phosphate excretion decreases as a
result of decreased nephron mass, serum calcium levels fall because of
deposition of calcium and phosphate in bone. Secretion of PTH
subsequently increases, and this causes the fraction of phosphate
excreted by each nephron to increase. Eventually, the chronic
intermittent hypocalcemia of chronic renal failure leads to chronically
high levels of serum PTH and hyperplasia of the parathyroid glands---
one of the entities termed secondary hyperparathyroidism. Symptomatic
primary hyperparathyroidism in patients younger than 50 years or with
serum calcium levels more than 1 mg/dL higher than the upper limit of
normal, a 30% or greater reduction in the glomerular filtration rate
(GFR), or severe bone demineralization is usually treated surgically. If
the patient refuses surgery or if other illnesses render surgery
inadvisable, medical management with the calcimimetic, cinacalcet, makes
management much more feasible. The difficulty with such management is
that the hyperfunctioning parathyroid glands secrete more hormone as the
serum calcium concentration is lowered
though the calcium set point for feedback regulation of PTH secretion
had been raised. Blanchard and colleagues demonstrated that patients
with "asymptomatic" primary hyperparathyroidism have clinical
improvement of their symptoms postoperatively even after 1 year, noting
younger patients and those with higher preoperative calcium levels show
the best improvement.94 Patients with moderate hypercalcemia who have
normal renal and cardiovascular function present no special preoperative
and preprocedure problems. The ECG can be examined preoperatively and
intraoperatively for shortened PR or QT intervals (Fig. 32.3). Because
severe hypercalcemia can result in substantial hypovolemia, normal
intravascular volume and electrolyte status should be evaluated and then
restored before anesthesia and surgery. Management of hypercalcemia
preoperatively should include (even in urgent or emergency situations)
treatment of the underlying cause, a frequent strategy in surgical
patients with malignancy-associated hypercalcemia. Therapy
preoperatively for both malignant and nonmalignant causes of
hypercalcemia include aggressive volume repletion, with the addition of
diuresis only if volume overload develops. Intravenous fluid infusion
rates of 250 to 500 mL/h preoperatively are commonly used to maintain
urine output greater than 200 mL/h.94a Careful monitoring during this
time is needed to avoid administration of an excessive amount of
intravenous fluids, as many patients may have compromised cardiac
function. In the setting of fluid overload, diuresis with furosemide can
be warranted; however, evidence for benefit is limited and mainly
theoreteical.94a Other complications of these interventions include
hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia. In emergency situations, vigorous
expansion of intravascular volume usually reduces serum calcium to a
safe level (\<14 mg/dL). Phosphate should be given to correct
hypophosphatemia because it decreases calcium uptake into bone,
increases calcium excretion, and stimulates breakdown of bone.
Hydration, accompanied by electrolyte repletion mainly phosphate,
suffices in the management of most hypercalcemic patients. Other
measures to decrease
reabsorption of bone include the bisphosphonates pamidronate sodium (90
mg intravenously) and zoledronate (4 mg intravenously). Case reports
note success in the setting of extreme hypercalcemia (\>20 mg/dL)
correction with a low calcium bath dialysate.94b Calcitonin lowers serum
calcium levels through direct inhibition of bone resorption. It can
decrease serum calcium levels within minutes after intravenous
administration. Side effects include urticaria and nausea. It is so
rapid acting that it can be used to reduce calcium levels while waiting
for hydration and a bisphosphonate to take effect. It is especially
important to know whether the hypercalcemia has been chronic because
serious cardiac, renal, or CNS abnormalities may have resulted.
Hypocalcemia Hypocalcemia (caused by hypoalbuminemia,
hypoparathyroidism, hypomagnesemia, hypovitaminosis D, hungry bone
syndrome after correction of hyperparathyroidism, anticonvulsant
therapy, citrate infusion, or chronic renal disease) is not usually
accompanied by a clinically evident cardiovascular disorder. The most
common cause of hypocalcemia is hypoalbuminemia. In true hypocalcemia
(i.e., when the free calcium concentration is low), myocardial
contractility is affected, noting myocardial contractility varies
directly with levels of blood ionized calcium. The clinical signs of
hypocalcemia include clumsiness; convulsions; laryngeal stridor;
depression; muscle stiffness; paresthesias; parkinsonism; tetany;
Chvostek sign; dry and scaly skin, brittle nails, and coarse hair; low
serum concentrations of calcium; prolonged QT intervals; soft tissue
calcifications; and Trousseau sign. Hypocalcemia delays ventricular
repolarization, hence increasing the QTc interval (normal, 0.35-0.44
second). With electrical systole prolonged, the ventricles may fail to
respond to the next electrical impulse from the sinoatrial node, with
second-degree heart block resulting. Prolongation of the QT interval is
a moderately reliable ECG sign of hypocalcemia, not for the population
as a whole, but for the individual patient.95 Thus monitoring the QT
interval as corrected for the heart rate is a useful, but not always
accurate means of monitoring hypocalcemia in any individual patient (see
Fig. 32.3). Heart failure may also occur with hypocalcemia, but is rare.
Because heart failure in patients with coexisting heart disease is
reduced in severity when calcium and magnesium ion levels are restored
to normal, these levels may be normalized preoperatively in a patient
with impaired exercise tolerance or signs of cardiovascular dysfunction;
normalization can be achieved intravenously over a 15-minute period if
absolutely necessary. Sudden decreases in blood levels of ionized
calcium (as with chelation therapy) can result in severe hypotension.
Patients with hypocalcemia may have seizures. They may be focal, petit
mal, or grand mal in appearance, often indistinguishable from such
seizures in the absence of hypocalcemia. Patients may also have a type
of seizure called cerebral tetany, which consists of generalized tetany
followed by tonic spasms. Therapy with standard anticonvulsants is
ineffective and may even exacerbate these seizures (by an anti--vitamin
D effect), calcium must be repleted for treatment. In long-standing
hypoparathyroidism, calcifications may appear above the sella; these
calcifications
represent deposits of calcium in and around small blood vessels of the
basal ganglia. They may be associated with a variety of extrapyramidal
syndromes. The most common cause of acquired hypoparathyroidism is
surgery of the thyroid or parathyroid glands. Other causes include
autoimmune disorders, therapy with iodine-131, hemosiderosis or
hemochromatosis, neoplasia, and granulomatous disease. Idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism has been divided into three categories: an isolated
persistent neonatal form, branchial dysembryogenesis, and autoimmune
candidiasis related to multiple endocrine deficiency.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism are rare
hereditary disorders characterized by short stature, obesity, rounded
face, and shortened metacarpals. Patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
have hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia despite high serum levels of
PTH. These patients have a deficient endorgan response to PTH as a
result of abnormalities in G-protein function. Because treatment of
hypoparathyroidism is not surgical, hypoparathyroid patients who come to
the operating room are those who require surgery for unrelated
conditions. Their calcium, phosphate, and magnesium levels should be
measured both preoperatively and postoperatively. Patients with
symptomatic hypocalcemia may be treated with intravenous calcium
gluconate preoperatively. Initially, 10 to 20 mL of 10% calcium
gluconate may be given at a rate of 5 mL/min. The effect on serum
calcium levels is of short duration, but a continuous infusion with 10
mL/min of 10% calcium gluconate in 500 mL of solution over a period of 6
hours helps keep serum calcium at adequate levels. For severe symptoms
in emergent settings, 10 mL of 10% calcium chloride may be given over 10
minutes, followed by a 10% calcium gluconate infusion. Magnesium and
phosphate levels may also require normalization to normalize
cardiovascular and nervous system function. The objective of therapy is
to bring the symptoms under control before the surgical procedure and
anesthesia. For patients with chronic hypoparathyroidism, the objective
is to keep the serum calcium level in the lower half of the normal
range. A preoperative and preprocedure ECG is useful for maintaining the
QTc interval. The preoperative and preprocedure QTc value may be used as
a guide to the serum calcium level if rapid laboratory assessment is not
possible. Changes in the calcium level may alter the duration of muscle
relaxation; thus careful monitoring and titration of muscle relaxation
with a twitch monitor is necessary. The intimate involvement of the
parathyroid gland with the thyroid gland can result in unintentional
hypocalcemia during surgery for diseases of either organ. Because of the
affinity of their bones for calcium, this relationship is crucial in
patients with advanced osteitis. Internal redistribution of magnesium,
calcium, or both ions may occur (into "hungry bones") after
parathyroidectomy and may cause hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, or both.
Because the tendency to tetany increases with alkalosis,
hyperventilation should be avoided. The most prominent manifestations of
acute hypocalcemia are distal paresthesias and muscle spasm (tetany).
Potentially fatal complications of severe hypocalcemia include laryngeal
spasm and hypocalcemic seizures. The clinical sequelae of magnesium
deficiency include cardiac
arrhythmias (principally ventricular tachyarrhythmias), hypocalcemic
tetany, and neuromuscular irritability independent of hypocalcemia
(tremors, twitching, asterixis, and seizures). In addition to monitoring
total serum calcium or ionized calcium postoperatively, one can test for
the Chvostek and Trousseau signs. The Chvostek sign is a contracture of
the facial muscles produced by tapping the ipsilateral facial nerve at
the angle of the jaw, of note this sign can be elicited in up to 15% of
patients who are not hypocalcemic, an attempt should be made to elicit
this sign preoperatively to ensure that its appearance is meaningful.
The Trousseau sign is elicited by applying a blood pressure cuff at a
level slightly above the systolic level for a few minutes. The resulting
carpopedal spasm, with contraction of the fingers and inability to open
the hand, stems from the increased muscle irritability in hypocalcemic
states, aggravated by ischemia produced by the blood pressure cuff.
Osteoporosis Fifty percent of women who are older than 65 years sustain
an osteoporotic fracture. (Because men are living longer, osteoporosis
has become an increasing problem for them, too, and reports indicate a
15% per decade hip fracture rate for men \>65 years old.)95 Men with
COPD (even without steroid treatment) are at high risk for vertebral
fractures. Furthermore, in either gender, each vertebral fracture is
associated with up to a 10% decrease in lung capacity. Diagnosis and
treatment of these conditions have increased with routine use of
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry or quantitative ultrasonography.
Because T-scores and Z-scores were developed to relate changes in white
postmenopausal women to those at age 21 years, care must be used in
interpreting the results. Known risk factors for osteoporosis include
age, relative lifetime estrogen deficiency (late menarche, amenorrhea,
early menopause, nulliparity), deficiency of dietary calcium, tobacco
use, increased aerobic exercise in combination with decreased
weight-bearing exercise, decreased weight-bearing exercise by itself,
use of soft drinks, and Asian or white ancestry. Although therapy for
osteoporosis (use of biphosphates, bone mineral depositors,
weight-bearing exercises, calcium, vitamin D, estrogen, and now designer
estrogens that may be useful for men, such as raloxifene \[Evista\])
does not have major known implications for anesthesia care.96-98 Bone
fractures in such patients have occurred on movement to and from an
operating table, therefore these patients should be allowed to move and
position themselves when possible. Recombinant PTH and calcitonin are
also used, but again, no reports of perioperative interactions have been
prominent.
PITUITARY ABNORMALITIES Anterior Pituitary Hypersecretion The anterior
pituitary gland (or master endocrine gland) consists of five
identifiable types of secretory cells and hormones produced:
somatotrophs (GH), corticotrophs (ACTH), lactotrophs (prolactin),
gonadotrophs (luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone), and
thyrotrophs (TSH). Secretion of these pituitary hormones is largely
regulated by a negative-feedback loop by hypothalamic regulatory
hormones and by signals that originate from the target site
of pituitary action. Six hypothalamic hormones have been characterized:
dopamine, the prolactin-inhibiting hormone; somatostatin, the GH
release--inhibiting hormone; GH-releasing hormone;
corticotropin-releasing hormone; gonadotropin-releasing hormone; and
TRH. Most pituitary tumors (\>60%) are hypersecretory and are classified
according to the excess production of a specific anterior pituitary
hormone. The most common disorders of pituitary hypersecretion are those
related to excesses of prolactin (amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and
infertility), ACTH (Cushing syndrome), and GH (acromegaly). In addition
to knowing the pathophysiologic processes of the disease involved, the
anesthesiologist must determine whether the patient recently underwent
air pneumoencephalography (almost obsolete, but still used rarely). If
so, nitrous oxide should not be used to lessen the risk of intracranial
hypertension from gas collection. CT or MRI of the sella has largely
replaced neuroencephalography. More than 99% of cases of acromegaly are
attributable to pituitary adenoma (or use of recombinant human GH). Thus
the primary treatment of acromegaly is transsphenoidal surgery (or
withdrawal of drug) and symptomatic treatment of the carpal tunnel or
other syndromes provoked. If the pituitary tumor is not totally removed,
patients are often offered external pituitary irradiation. In the case
of suprasellar extension, conventional transfrontal hypophysectomy is
often performed. The dopaminergic agonist bromocriptine can lower GH
levels, but the long-term follow-up with this drug is not favorable.
Octreotide, a longacting analogue of somatostatin, now given in depot
form approximately once a month, produces effective palliation in 50% of
patients. Other medical therapies such as pegvisomant or somatostatin
analogues are also medications that have been tried before surgical
intervention. In 2011, new guidelines were published with few changes to
the available recommendations.99 However, the new guidelines reported
some evidence that medication taken preoperatively may result in a
better postoperative outcome. Difficulty with endotracheal intubation
should be anticipated in a patient with acromegaly; lateral neck
radiographs or CT scans of the neck and direct or indirect visualization
can identify patients with subglottic stenosis or an enlarged tongue,
mandible, epiglottis, or vocal cords. If placement of an arterial line
is necessary, a brachial or femoral site may be preferable to a radial
site.100
Anterior Pituitary Hypofunction Anterior pituitary hypofunction results
in deficiency of one or more of the following hormones: GH, TSH, ACTH,
prolactin, or gonadotropin. No special preoperative and preprocedure
preparation is required for a patient deficient in prolactin or
gonadotropin; deficiency in GH, however, can result in atrophy of
cardiac muscle, a condition that may necessitate preoperative and
preprocedure cardiac evaluation. Nonetheless, anesthetic problems have
not been documented in patients with isolated GH deficiency. Acute
deficiencies are another matter. Acute pituitary deficiency is often
caused by bleeding into a pituitary tumor. In surgical specimens of
resected adenomas, as many as 25% show evidence of hemorrhage. These
patients often have acute headache, visual loss, nausea
or vomiting, ocular palsy, disturbances of consciousness, fever,
vertigo, or hemiparesis. In such patients, rapid transsphenoidal
decompression should be accompanied by consideration of replacement
therapy, including glucocorticoids and the treatment of increased
intracranial pressure. Obstetric anesthesiologists are often aware of
these pituitary failure problems; Sheehan syndrome is the clinical
manifestation of pituitary infarction associated with hypotension during
or after obstetric hemorrhage. Conditions that strongly suggest this
diagnosis are failure to start postpartum lactation, increasing fatigue,
cold intolerance, and especially hypotension unresponsive to volume
replacement and pressors; treatment is prompt hormone therapy.100a
Posterior Pituitary Hormone Excess and Deficiency Secretion of
vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is enhanced by increased serum
osmolality or the presence of hypotension. Inappropriate secretion of
vasopressin, without relation to serum osmolality, results in
hyponatremia and fluid retention. This inappropriate secretion can
result from the following: a variety of CNS lesions; drugs including
nicotine, narcotics, tramadol, chlorpropamide, clofibrate, vincristine,
vinblastine, and cyclophosphamide; and pulmonary infections,
hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, and ectopic production from
tumors. Preoperative and preprocedure management of a surgical patient
with inappropriate secretion of vasopressin includes appropriate
treatment of the causative disorders and restriction of water.
Occasionally, drugs that inhibit the renal response to ADH (e.g.,
lithium or demeclocycline) should be administered preoperatively to
restore normal intravascular volume and electrolyte status. Most of the
clinical features associated with the syndrome of inappropriate
secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) are related to hyponatremia
and the resulting brain edema; such features include weight gain,
weakness, lethargy, mental confusion, obtundation, and disordered
reflexes and may culminate in convulsions and coma. Investigators have
recognized that up to 20% of longdistance runners have SIADH with
increased vasopressin secretion. Because such people infrequently
undergo surgical treatment of injuries, SIADH symptoms and laboratory
evaluation may be routine for that group as well. SIADH should be
suspected in any patient with hyponatremia who excretes urine that is
hypertonic relative to plasma. The following laboratory findings further
support the diagnosis: 1. Urinary sodium greater than 20 mEq/L 2. Low
serum levels of BUN, creatinine, uric acid, and albumin 3. Serum sodium
lower than 130 mEq/L 4. Plasma osmolality lower than 270 mOsm/L 5. Urine
hypertonic relative to plasma Noting the response to water loading is a
useful way of evaluating patients with hyponatremia. Patients with SIADH
are unable to excrete dilute urine even after water loading. Assay of
ADH in blood can confirm the diagnosis. Too vigorous treatment of
chronic hyponatremia can result in disabling osmotic demyelination
syndrome.101,102 The increase in serum sodium should not be greater than
1 mEq/L/h.101,102
Patients with mild to moderate symptoms of water intoxication can be
treated with restriction of fluid intake to approximately 500 to 1000
mL/day. Patients with severe water intoxication and CNS symptoms may
need vigorous treatment consisting of intravenous administration of
hypertonic saline solutions until symptoms resolve, followed by fluid
restriction. Treatment should be directed at the underlying problem. If
SIADH is drug induced, use of the drug should be withdrawn. Inflammation
should be treated with appropriate measures, and neoplasms should be
managed by surgical resection, irradiation, or chemotherapy, whichever
is indicated. No drugs are available that can suppress release of ADH
from the neurohypophysis or from a tumor. Phenytoin (Dilantin) and
narcotic antagonists such as naloxone and butorphanol have some
inhibiting effect on physiologic ADH release but are clinically
ineffective in patients with SIADH. Drugs that block the effect of ADH
on renal tubules include lithium, which is rarely used because its
toxicity often outweighs its benefits, and demethylchlortetracycline in
doses of 900 to 1200 mg/day. Demethylchlortetracycline interferes with
the ability of the renal tubules to concentrate urine, thereby causing
excretion of isotonic or hypotonic urine and lessening the hyponatremia.
This drug can be used in ambulatory patients with SIADH when it is
difficult to restrict fluids. When a patient with SIADH comes to the
operating room for any surgical procedure, fluids are managed by
measuring volume status, when the clinical picture is unclear the use of
arterial wave form analysis, central venous pressure, pulmonary artery
pressure, or transthoracic and/or transesophageal echocardiography may
be of value. Despite the common impression that SIADH is frequently seen
in older patients in the postoperative period, studies have shown that
the patient's age and the type of anesthetic used have no bearing on the
postoperative development of SIADH. It is common to see several patients
in the neurosurgical ICU suffering from this syndrome. The diagnosis is
usually one of exclusion. Patients with SIADH generally require only
restriction of intravenous fluids, very rarely is hypertonic saline
needed. Lack of ADH, which results in diabetes insipidus, is caused by
pituitary disease, brain tumors, infiltrative diseases such as
sarcoidosis, head trauma (including trauma after neurosurgery), or lack
of a renal response to ADH. The last can result from such diverse
conditions as hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, sickle cell anemia,
obstructive uropathy, and renal insufficiency. Preoperative or
preprocedure treatment of diabetes insipidus consists of restoring
normal intravascular volume by replacing urinary losses, administering
desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) nasally, and giving daily fluid
requirements intravenously. Perioperative management of patients with
diabetes insipidus is based on the extent of the ADH deficiency.
Management of a patient with complete diabetes insipidus and a total
lack of ADH does not usually present any major problem as long as the
side effects of the drug are avoided and the presence of the condition
is known preoperatively. Just before the surgical procedure, the patient
is given the usual dose of DDAVP intranasally or an intravenous bolus of
100 milliunits of aqueous vasopressin, followed by a

constant infusion of 100 to 200 milliunits/h.1 The dose is usually
adjusted to permit the daily breakthrough polyuria that prevents the
iatrogenic syndrome of SIADH. All the intravenous fluids given
intraoperatively should be isotonic to reduce the risk of water
depletion and hypernatremia. Plasma osmolality should be frequently
measured, both intraoperatively and immediately postoperatively. If
plasma osmolality rises much higher than 300 mOsm/L, hypotonic fluids
can be administered; the rate of the intraoperative vasopressin infusion
can be increased to greater than 200 milliunits/h. For patients who have
a partial deficiency of ADH, it is not necessary to use aqueous
vasopressin perioperatively unless plasma osmolality rises to more than
300 mOsm/L. Nonosmotic stimuli (e.g., volume depletion) and the stress
of surgery usually cause the release of large quantities of ADH
perioperatively. Consequently, these patients require only frequent
monitoring of plasma osmolality during this period. Because of side
effects, the dose of vasopressin should be limited to that necessary for
control of diuresis. The oxytocic and coronary artery--constricting
properties of vasopressin make this limit especially applicable to
patients who are pregnant or have CAD.
Diseases Involving the Cardiovascular System HYPERTENSION Analysis of
the perioperative treatment of hypertension is important because of the
prevalence of the condition (33.5% of adults aged 20 and over in the
United States), the great risk in perioperative care of a hypertensive
patient, and the high cost of unnecessary delays in surgical treatment.
Numerous studies over the years have evaluated the impact of
hypertension as one of the risk factors for cardiac morbidity. However,
the need to delay surgery because of poorly controlled hypertension has
been questioned. Weksler and colleagues studied 989 hypertensive
patients who were treated on a long-term basis and who underwent
noncardiac surgery with diastolic blood pressure between 110 and 130 mm
Hg and no previous MI, unstable or severe angina pectoris, renal
failure, pregnancy-induced hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy,
previous coronary revascularization, aortic stenosis, preoperative
dysrhythmias, conduction defects, or stroke.103 The control group had
their surgical procedures postponed and remained in the hospital for
control of blood pressure, and the study patients received 10 mg of
nifedipine intranasally. No statistically significant differences in
postoperative complications were observed, thus suggesting that this
subset of patients without significant cardiovascular comorbid
conditions can proceed with surgery despite elevated blood pressure on
the day of the operation. Several studies have assessed the relationship
between cardiovascular disease and preoperative hypertension. In a
multicenter study of patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG), the presence of isolated systolic hypertension was associated
with a 30% increased incidence of perioperative cardiovascular
complications
when compared with normotensive individuals.104 Kheterpal and colleagues
integrated data from their anesthesia information system (AIMS) and the
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
Project (NSQIP) and found hypertension to be one of the independent
predictors of events.105 Wax and colleagues used AIMS to identify
independent predictors of troponin elevation or death, and independent
predictors of adverse outcome included increased baseline systolic blood
pressure (SBP), intraoperative diastolic blood pressure lower than 85 mm
Hg, increased intraoperative heart rate, blood transfusion, and
anesthetic technique, controlling for standard risk factors.106 A delay
of surgery did not result in interval normalization of blood pressure.
Although preoperative blood pressure (both systolic and diastolic) is a
significant predictor of postoperative morbidity, no data definitively
establish whether preoperative treatment of hypertension reduces
perioperative risk. Until a definitive study is performed, we recommend
letting the weight of evidence guide preoperative treatment of a patient
with hypertension. Such treatment would be based on three general
beliefs: (1) the patient should be educated regarding the importance of
lifelong treatment of hypertension, even isolated systolic hypertension;
(2) perioperative hemodynamic fluctuations occur less frequently in
treated than in untreated hypertensive patients (as demonstrated by
Prys-Roberts and colleagues107 and confirmed by Goldman and Caldera108
and Mangano and associates109); and (3) hemodynamic fluctuations have
some relation to morbidity. Kheterpal and colleagues demonstrated that
patients who sustained a cardiac adverse event were more likely to
experience an episode of mean arterial pressure lower than 50 mm Hg, an
episode of 40% decrease in mean arterial pressure, and an episode of
heart rate higher than 100 beats/min.105 The data of Pasternack and
colleagues and Weksler and associates imply that rapid correction of
blood pressure or prevention of increases in heart rate may be all that
is needed.103,110 Sessler and colleagues (2018) studied 9765 patients in
the POISE-II trial to assess the relationship between perioperative
hypotension and a composite of MI and death within 30-days of
surgery.110aa Intraoperatively, the estimated average relative effect
was 1.08 (98.3% confidence interval \[CI\], 1.03, 1.12; P \< .001) per
10-minute increase in hypotension duration. The average relative effect
odds ratio was 2.83 (98.3% CI, 1.26, 6.35; P = .002) in patients with
hypotension during the subsequent 4 days of hospitalization. The
Intraoperative Norepinephrine to Control Arterial Pressure (INPRESS)
study was a multicenter, randomized, parallel-group clinical trial in
adult patients (n = 298) at increased risk of postoperative
complications of individualized management strategy aimed at achieving a
SBP within 10% of the reference value (i.e., patient's resting SBP) or
standard management strategy of treating SBP less than 80 mm Hg or lower
than 40% from the reference value during and for 4 hours following
surgery.110a Management targeting an individualized SBP, compared with
standard management, reduced the risk of postoperative organ
dysfunction. Taken together, these data suggest that maintenance of
normal blood pressure is critical in patients with hypertension. The
INPRESS study demonstrated that preoperative data should be used to
determine the individualized range of
suitable arterial blood pressure values that are tolerable by a
particular patient during and after a surgical procedure. Importantly,
hypotension in patients at risk for a cerebrovascular event should be
avoided. For example, the POISE (Perioperative Ischemic Evaluation)
study demonstrated that short-term β-blocker administration resulted in
an increased incidence of stroke and death that was associated with an
increased rate of hypotension.111
Preoperative Administration of All Antihypertensive Drugs Continuation
of all antihypertensive drugs preoperatively should be considered,
except ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists, for which no clear
consensus exists. Coriat and colleagues found that ACE inhibitors were
associated with hypotension in 100% of patients during induction versus
approximately 20% in whom ACE inhibitors were withheld on the morning of
the surgical procedure.112 Bertrand and coworkers performed a
prospective randomized study that demonstrated that more severe
hypotensive episodes requiring vasoconstrictor treatment occurred after
induction of general anesthesia in patients treated on a long-term basis
with an angiotensin II antagonist and receiving the drug on the morning
before the operation than in those in whom angiotensin II antagonists
were discontinued on the day before the surgical procedure.113 Kheterpal
and colleagues performed a propensity-matched analysis of 12,381
noncardiac surgical cases.114 Patients with longterm ACE inhibitor or
angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) and diuretic therapy showed more
periods with a mean arterial blood pressure lower than 70 mm Hg, periods
with a 40% decrease in SBP, periods with a 50% decrease in SBP, and
vasopressor boluses than did patients receiving diuretic therapy alone.
If these drugs are continued, vasopressin is the drug of choice for
refractory hypotension. Investigators at the Cleveland Clinic evaluated
79,228 patients (9905 ACE inhibitor users \[13%\] and 66,620 \[87%\]
non--ACE inhibitor users) who had noncardiac surgery between 2005 and
2009.115 These investigators did not find any association between use of
ACE inhibitors and intraoperative or postoperative upper airway
complications. ACE inhibitor use was not associated with in-hospital
complications or increased 30-day mortality. Investigators of the VISION
trial studied the relationship between withholding ACE
inhibitors/angiotensin II receptor blockers and a primary composite
outcome of all-cause death, stroke, or myocardial injury after
noncardiac surgery at 30 days. Withholding ACE inhibitors/angiotensin II
receptor blockers before major noncardiac surgery was associated with a
lower risk of death and postoperative vascular events (150/1245
\[12.0%\] vs. 459/3557 \[12.9%\]; adjusted relative risk, 0.82; 95% CI,
0.70-0.96). In an accompanying editorial, London suggested that the
current study does provide strong impetus for a randomized trial but
does not warrant changes in local practice until such a trial is
completed.116
Role of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft or Percutaneous Coronary
Interventions Before Noncardiac Surgical Procedures Coronary
revascularization may reduce the perioperative risk before noncardiac
surgery, but the evidence suggests that it is limited to those with
indications similar to the nonsurgical arena. The strongest
retrospective evidence comes from the Coronary Artery Surgery Study
registry, which enrolled patients from 1978 to 1981. Operative mortality
in patients with CABG performed before noncardiac surgery was 0.9% but
was significantly higher at 2.4% in patients without previous CABG.
However, a 1.4% mortality rate was associated with the CABG procedure
itself. The benefit of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) before
noncardiac surgery has also been examined in several cohort studies.
Posner and colleagues used an administrative dataset of patients who
underwent PCI and noncardiac surgery in Washington State.121 These
investigators matched patients with coronary disease who were undergoing
noncardiac surgery with and without previous PCI and looked at cardiac
complications. In this nonrandomized design, Posner and colleagues noted
a significantly lower rate of 30-day cardiac complications in patients
who underwent PCI at least 90 days before the noncardiac surgery.
However, PCI within 90 days of noncardiac surgery did not improve
outcome. Although the explanation for these results is unknown, they may
support the notion that PCI performed "to get the patient through
surgery" may not improve perioperative outcome because cardiac
complications may not occur in patients with stable or asymptomatic
coronary stenosis. PCI may actually destabilize coronary plaque, which
becomes manifest in the days or weeks after noncardiac surgery. Godet
and associates studied a cohort of 1152 patients after abdominal aortic
surgery in which 78 patients underwent PCI.122 In the PCI group, the
observed percentages of patients with a severe postoperative coronary
event (9.0%; 95% CI, 4.4-17.4) or death (5.1% \[95% CI, 2.0-12.5\]) were
not significantly different from the expected percentages (8.2% and
6.9%, respectively), which was confirmed by propensity analysis. PCI did
not seem to significantly limit cardiac risk or death after aortic
surgery. Several randomized trials have addressed the value of testing
and CABG or PCI, or both, in a subset of patients. McFalls and
colleagues reported the results of a multicenter randomized trial in the
VA Health System in which patients with documented CAD on coronary
angiography, excluding those with left main CAD or a severely depressed
ejection fraction (\<20%), were randomized to CABG (59%), or
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA; 41%) versus
routine medical therapy.123 At 2.7 years after randomization, mortality
in the revascularization group was not significantly different (22%)
from that in the norevascularization group (23%; Fig. 32.4). Within 30
days after the vascular operation, postoperative MI, defined by elevated
troponin levels, occurred in 12% of the revascularization group and in
14% of the no-revascularization group (P = .37). The authors suggested
that coronary revascularization is not indicated in patients with stable
CAD, and
their results further support the lack of efficacy of PCI or CABG for
single- or double-vessel disease before noncardiac surgery. However, in
a follow-up analysis, Ward and coauthors reported improved outcome in
the subset of patients who underwent CABG versus PCI.124 Poldermans and
colleagues randomized 770 patients about to undergo major vascular
surgery and considered to have intermediate cardiac risk, defined as the
presence of 1 or 2 cardiac risk factors, to either undergo further risk
stratification with stress imaging or proceed directly to surgery.125
All patients received bisoprolol with a targeted heart rate of 60 to 65
beats/min initiated before and continued after the surgical procedure.
The 30-day incidence of cardiac death and nonfatal MI was similar in
both groups (1.8% in the no-testing group vs. 2.3% in the tested group).
The conclusions of the authors were that further risk stratification in
this group of patients considered to be at intermediate risk based on
clinical history alone was unnecessary as long as perioperative
β-blockers were used and that testing only delayed necessary vascular
surgery. In a pilot study, Poldermans and associates tested patients
with more than three risk factors; 101 (23%) showed extensive ischemia
and were randomly assigned to revascularization (n = 49) or no
revascularization.126 Revascularization did not improve 30-day outcome;
the incidence of the composite end-point was 43% versus 33% (odds ratio
\[OR\], 1.4; 95% CI, 0.7-2.8; P = .30). In addition, no benefit during
1-year follow-up was observed after coronary revascularization (49%
vs. 44%; OR, 1.2; 95% CI, 0.7-2.3; P = .48). Concern was expressed by
Erasmus University (Rotterdam, the Netherlands) regarding the scientific
integrity of studies led by Poldermans, as detailed in Erasmus MC
Follow-up Investigation Committee: Report on the 2012 follow-up
investigation of possible breaches of academic integrity, September 30,
2012 (https://www.forbes.com/sites/larryhusten/2012/10/09/
erasmus-medical-center-releases-final-report-on-cardiovascular-research-scandal/#675d592528ae).
The articles have 1.0 No coronary artery revascularization 0.8
Probability of survival

0.6 Coronary artery revascularization 0.4 0.2 P = .92

0 0

1

Years No. at risk Revascularization No revascularization

2

3

4

5

6

Years after randomization 1 2 3 4 226 229

175 172

113 108

65 55

5

6

18 17

7 12

Fig. 32.4 Long-term survival in patients randomized to coronary
revascularization or routine care in patients with coronary artery
disease on angiography and undergoing major vascular surgical procedures
in the Coronary Artery Revascularization Prophylaxis trial. (From
McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, et al. Coronary-artery revascularization
before elective major vascular surgery. N Engl J Med.
2004;351:2795--2804.)
not been retracted, but these data should be viewed with some
skepticism. The authors of the 2014 AHA/ACCF Guidelines decided that the
nonretracted decrease publications and/or other derivative studies by
Poldermans that are relevant to the topic can only be cited in the text
with a comment about the finding compared with the current
recommendation but did not form the basis of that recommendation. One
issue in interpreting the results is that the length of time between
coronary revascularization and noncardiac surgery most likely has an
impact on its protective effect and potential risks. Back and coworkers
studied 425 consecutive patients undergoing 481 elective major vascular
operations at an academic VA Medical Center.127 Coronary
revascularization was classified as recent (CABG \< 1 year; PTCA \< 6
months) in 35 cases (7%), prior (CABG \>1 year and ≤5 years; PTCA \>6
months and ≤2 years) in 45 cases (9%), and remote (CABG ≥ 5 years; PTCA
≥ 2 years) in 48 cases (10%). Outcomes in patients with previous PTCA
were similar to those after CABG (P = .7). Significant differences in
adverse cardiac events and mortality were found among patients with CABG
performed within 5 years or PTCA within 2 years (6.3%, 1.3%,
respectively), individuals with remote revascularization (10.4%, 6.3%),
and nonrevascularized patients stratified at high risk (13.3%, 3.3%) or
intermediate/low risk (2.8%, 0.9%). The authors concluded that previous
coronary revascularization (CABG \< 5 years; PTCA \< 2 years) may
provide only modest protection against adverse cardiac events and
mortality after major arterial reconstruction. PCI using coronary
stenting poses several special issues. Kaluza and associates reported on
the outcome of 40 patients who underwent prophylactic coronary stent
placement less than 6 weeks before major noncardiac surgery requiring
general anesthesia.128 Among these patients, 7 MIs, 11 major bleeding
episodes, and 8 deaths were noted. All deaths and MIs, as well as 8 of
the 11 bleeding episodes, occurred in patients subjected to surgical
procedures less than 14 days after stenting. Four patients died after
undergoing surgical procedures 1 day after stenting. Wilson and
colleagues reported on 207 patients who underwent noncardiac surgery
within 2 months of stent placement.129 Eight patients died or suffered
an MI, all of whom were among the 168 patients who had surgical
procedures 6 weeks after stent placement. Vicenzi and coworkers studied
103 patients and reported that the risk of suffering a perioperative
cardiac event was 2.11-fold greater in patients with recent stents (\<35
days before surgery) than in those who underwent PCI more than 90 days
before surgical procedures.130 Leibowitz and associates studied a total
of 216 consecutive patients who underwent PCI within 3 months of
noncardiac surgery (PTCA, 122; stent, 94).131 A total of 26 patients
(12%) died, 13 in the stent group (14%), and 13 in the PTCA group (11%),
a nonsignificant difference. The incidence of acute MI and death within
6 months was not significantly different (7% and 14% in the stent group
and 6% and 11% in the PTCA group, respectively). Significantly more
events occurred in the two groups when noncardiac surgery was performed
within 2 weeks of PCI. Based on the accumulating data, elective
noncardiac surgery after PCI, with or without stent placement, should be
delayed for 4 to 6 weeks.
Drug-eluting stents may represent an even greater problem during the
perioperative period based on case reports. Nasser and coauthors
described two patients with in-stent thrombosis occurring 4 and 21
months after the implantation of sirolimus-eluting stents.132
Drug-eluting stents may represent an additional risk over a prolonged
period (≤12 months), particularly if antiplatelet drugs are
discontinued.133 One study demonstrated that although the frequency of
major noncardiac surgery in the year after drug-eluting stent placement
was more than 4%, the overall risk of adverse outcomes was less than
previously reported when surgical procedures were performed months after
drug-eluting stent placement.134 However, the risk was significantly
increased in the week after major noncardiac surgery. A population-based
study in Canada using administrative healthcare databases demonstrated
that the earliest optimal time for elective surgery is 46 to 180 days
after bare-metal stent implantation or more than 180 days after
drug-eluting stent implantation.135 Hawn and colleagues used a national,
retrospective cohort study of 41,989 VA and non-VA operations occurring
in the 24 months after coronary stent implantation between 2000 and
2010.136 Among patients undergoing noncardiac surgery within 2 years of
coronary stent placement, major adverse cardiac events were associated
with emergency surgery and advanced cardiac disease but not stent type
or timing of surgery beyond 6 months after stent implantation. The 2016
DAPT Guidelines (Fig. 32.5) suggest continuing aspirin therapy in all
patients with a coronary stent and discontinuing clopidogrel for as
short a time interval as possible for patients with bare-metal stents
less than 30 days or drug-eluting stents less than 6 months; with DAPT
it can be discontinued.136a Based upon the non-perioperative literature,
there is a suggestion that holding clopidogrel for the traditional 8
days may actually increase risk associated with a hypercoagulable
rebound suggesting a shorter period of time may be optimal. A recent
cohort study suggests that withdrawal of antiplatelet agents greater
than 5 days is associated with increased major adverse cardiac
events.136b
Perioperative Risk Factors for Cardiac Morbidity and Mortality A
thorough history should focus on cardiovascular risk factors and
symptoms or signs of unstable cardiac disease states, such as myocardial
ischemia with minimal exertion, active CHF, symptomatic valvular heart
disease, and significant cardiac arrhythmias. The presence of unstable
angina is associated with a 28% incidence of perioperative MI.137 Such
patients would benefit from delaying elective surgery to address their
CAD. For those patients with chronic stable angina, exercise tolerance
appears to be a good method of assessing perioperative risk. In
virtually all studies, the presence of active CHF has been associated
with increased perioperative cardiac morbidity.138 In addition, multiple
studies have demonstrated that reduced ejection fraction is associated
with an increased incidence of perioperative cardiac events.139,140 Flu
and colleagues performed echocardiography in patients undergoing
vascular surgery and found that for open surgical procedures,
asymptomatic systolic left ventricular dysfunction and asymptomatic
diastolic left ventricular

Patients Treated With PCI Undergoing Elective Noncardiac Surgery

BMS treated with DAPT

DES treated with DAPT

0d

30 d

\<30 d since BMS implantation

≥30 d since BMS implantation

Class III: Harm Delay surgery

Class I: Proceed with surgery

\<3 mo since DES implantation

3 mo Class III: Harm Delay surgery

3-6 mo since DES implantation, discontinue DAPT; delayed surgery risk is
great than stent thrombosis risk

6 mo Class IIb: Proceeding with surgery may be considered

≥ 6 mo since DES implantation, discontinue DAPT Class I: Proceed with
surgery

Fig. 32.5 Proposed algorithm for antiplatelet management in patients
with percutaneous coronary intervention and noncardiac surgery. ASA,
Aspirin; BMS, bare metal stent; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; DES,
drug-eluting stent. (From Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et
al. 2014 ACC/AHA guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation
and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:e77--e137.)

dysfunction were both associated with increased 30-day cardiovascular
event rates (OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.4-3.6; and OR, 1.8; 95% CI 1.1 to 2.9,
respectively) and long-term cardiovascular mortality (hazard ratio, 4.6;
95% CI 2.4-8.5; and hazard ratio, 3.0; 95% CI 1.5 to 6.0,
respectively).141 In patients undergoing endovascular surgery (n = 356),
only symptomatic heart failure was associated with an increase in 30-day
cardiovascular events and long-term cardiovascular mortality. These
results suggest that stabilization of ventricular function and treatment
of pulmonary congestion is prudent before elective surgery. A recent MI
has traditionally been an important predictor of perioperative risk. The
more recent the MI, particularly within 3 to 6 months, the greater is
the perioperative risk. However, like the Goldman Cardiac Risk Index,
medicine has changed and outcomes are improved. The 2014 AHA/ ACC
Foundation (AHA/ACCF) guidelines advocate the use of 60 days as being
high risk.119 After that time, further risk stratification depends on
clinical symptoms. For those patients without overt symptoms or a
history of CAD, the probability of CAD varies with the type and number
of atherosclerotic risk factors present. Diabetes accelerates the
progression of atherosclerosis, which can frequently be silent, leading
many clinicians to assume that diabetes is a CAD equivalent and treating
patients as such. Diabetes is an independent risk factor for
perioperative cardiac
morbidity, and the preoperative treatment with insulin has been included
in the Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI). In attempting to determine the
degree of the increased risk associated with diabetes, the treatment
modality, duration of the disease, and other associated end-organ
dysfunction should be taken into account. Significant intraoperative
factors that correlate with perioperative risk and that may be avoided
or altered are (1) unnecessary use of vasopressors,142,143 (2)
unintentional hypotension144-146 (this point is controversial, however,
because some investigators have found that unintentional hypotension
does not correlate with perioperative morbidity143), (3) hypothermia,147
(4) too low or too high a hematocrit,148,149 and (5) lengthy
operations.145 Significant intraoperative factors that correlate with
perioperative morbidity and probably cannot be avoided are (1) emergency
surgery and (2) thoracic or intraperitoneal surgery or above-the-knee
amputations.145,150-164 Several risk indices were developed in a
prospective cohort study by Lee and associates.164 They studied 4315
patients 50 years old or older who were undergoing elective major
noncardiac procedures in a tertiary care teaching hospital. The six
independent predictors of complications included in a RCRI were
high-risk type of surgery, history of ischemic heart disease, history of
CHF, history of cerebrovascular disease, preoperative treatment with
insulin,
and preoperative serum creatinine greater than 2.0 mg/dL; increasing
cardiac complication rates were noted with an increasing number of risk
factors.164 The RCRI has become the standard tool in the literature for
assessing perioperative cardiac risk in a given individual and has been
used to direct the decision to perform cardiovascular testing and
implement perioperative management protocols. It has been validated for
both short-term and long-term cardiovascular outcomes.165 It has also
been shown to predict long-term quality of life.165 Therefore, the RCRI
can be used to help define both the short-term and long-term risks of
cardiovascular disease in the surgical patient. The American College of
Surgeons NSQIP created a Surgical Risk Calculator from 525 participating
hospitals and more than 1 million operations.166 This risk calculator
uses the specific current procedural terminology code of the procedure
being performed to enable procedure-specific risk assessment and
includes 21 patient-specific variables (e.g., age, sex, body mass index,
dyspnea, previous MI). From this input, it calculates the percentage of
risk of a major adverse cardiac event, death, and eight other outcomes.
Use of this risk calculator may offer the best estimation for
surgeryspecific risk of a major adverse cardiac event and death. The
American College of Surgeons NSQIP Myocardial Infarction and Cardiac
Arrest risk prediction rule is more specific for cardiac
complications.167 Using these definitions of outcome and chart-based
data collection methods, the authors derived a risk index that was
robust in the derivation and validation stages and appeared to
outperform the RCRI (which was tested in the same dataset) in terms of
discriminative power, particularly among patients undergoing vascular
surgery. A primary issue with all these indices is that a simple
estimate of risk does not help in refining perioperative management for
an individual patient. Therefore, the consultant must communicate the
extent and stability of the patient's CAD, rather than make a simple
statement of risk classification. The goal in providing anesthesia to
patients with ischemic heart disease is to achieve the best preoperative
condition obtainable by treating conditions that correlate with
perioperative risk. The next step is to intraoperatively monitor for
conditions that correlate with perioperative risk and avoid
circumstances that lead to perioperative risk.
Preoperative and Preprocedure Therapy The only way known to increase
oxygen supply to the myocardium of patients with coronary artery
stenosis is to maintain adequate diastolic blood pressure, hemoglobin
concentration, and oxygen saturation. The main goals of anesthesia
practice for these patients have been to decrease the determinants of
myocardial oxygen demand, heart rate, ventricular wall tension, and
contractile performance, and to improve plaque stabilization. Thus
medical management designed to preserve all viable myocardial tissue may
include the following: 1. Multiple  studies have demonstrated improved
outcome in patients given perioperative β-blockers, especially if heart
rate is controlled, acknowledging the previously discussed concerns
regarding the quality of the studies from the Erasmus group.167a,b
Subsequent studies dem-
onstrated that β-blockers may not be effective if heart rate is not well
controlled, or in lower risk patients.167c-e The POISE trial was
published in which 8351 high-risk β-blocker-naïve patients were
randomized to high-dose continuous-release metoprolol versus
placebo.167f 2. There was a significant reduction in the primary outcome
of cardiovascular events associated with a 30% reduction in MI rate, but
with a significantly increased rate of 30-day all-cause mortality and
stroke. Several recent cohort studies continue to support the fact that
high-risk patients on β-blockers were associated with improved outcome.
A Canadian administrative dataset suggested that the perioperative
morbidity would be higher if β-blockers were started within 7 days as
compared to 8 days or greater. As part of the update to the current
ACC/AHA Guidelines, an Evidence Review Committee was formed to
independently review the data on perioperative β-blockade. Perioperative
β-blockade started within 1 day or less before noncardiac surgery
prevents nonfatal MI but increases risks of stroke, death, hypotension,
and bradycardia.167g Without the controversial DECREASE studies, there
are insufficient data on β-blockade started two or more days prior to
surgery. Wallace and associates reported that perioperative β-blockade
administered according to the Perioperative Cardiac Risk Reduction
protocol is associated with a reduction in 30-day and 1-year
mortality.167h Perioperative withdrawal of β-blockers is associated with
increased mortality. The current ACCF/AHA Guidelines on perioperative
β-blockade advocate that perioperative β-blockade is a Class I
indication and should be used in patients previously on β-blockers. The
new recommendations changed the recommendation from a Class IIa to IIb
for patients undergoing vascular surgery who are at high cardiac risk
owing to CAD or the finding of cardiac ischemia on preoperative testing
(Box 32.3). 2. Vasodilation  (with nitroglycerin or its "long-acting"
analogues nitroprusside, hydralazine, or prazosin) to decrease
ventricular wall tension may be beneficial, although currently no
randomized trials support the prophylactic use of these
agents.109,110,168 There are no data to support the routine use of
pulmonary artery catheters and transesophageal echocardiography for this
type of patient.158,169 The intraoperative management of patients with
ischemic heart disease is discussed in further detail in Chapters 31 and
54 and in published guidelines.117 3. Other medications. In POISE II,
α-2 agonists were not shown to improve perioperative outcome.169a POISE
II also evaluated the effectiveness of aspirin therapy in a cohort of
patients without a recent stent. Administration of aspirin before
surgery and throughout the early postsurgical period had no significant
effect on the rate of a composite of death or nonfatal MI but increased
the risk of major bleeding.169b Most recently, perioperative statins
have been shown to improve cardiac outcome. Durazzo and colleagues
published a randomized trial of 200 vascular surgery patients in which
statins were started an average of 30 days prior to vascular
surgery.169c A significant reduction in cardiovascular complications was
demonstrated using this protocol. Le Manach and colleagues demonstrated
that statin
BOX 32.3 2014 ACC/AHA Recommendations for Perioperative β-Blockade Class
I □

-Blockers should be continued in patients undergoing surgery β who have
been on β-blockers chronically.111-117 (Level of Evidence: B)

tively is reasonable, but should be restarted as soon as reasonable. The
new study questions this recommendation, but further randomized trials
are needed. 4. Perioperative transfusion therapy is discussed in more
detail in Chapter 49. The FOCUS (Functional Outcomes in Cardiovascular
Patients Undergoing Surgical Repair of Hip Fracture) trial was unable to
demonstrate benefit in high-risk patients with hip fracture between a
high and low transfusion trigger.170

Class IIa □

It is reasonable for the management of β-blockers after surgery to be
guided by clinical circumstances, independent of when the agent was
started.110,117,118 (Level of Evidence: B)

Class IIb In patients with intermediate- or high-risk myocardial
ischemia noted in preoperative risk stratification tests, it may be
reasonable to begin perioperative β-blockers.119 (Level of Evidence: C)
□ In patients with three or more RCRI risk factors (e.g., diabetes
mellitus, heart failure, coronary artery disease, renal insufficiency,
cerebrovascular accident), it may be reasonable to begin β-blockers
before surgery.117 (Level of Evidence: B) □ In patients with a
compelling long-term indication for β-blocker therapy but no other RCRI
risk factors, initiating β-blockers in the perioperative setting as an
approach to reduce perioperative risk is of uncertain
benefit.111,117,120 (Level of Evidence: B) □ In patients in whom
β-blocker therapy is initiated, it may be reasonable to begin
perioperative β-blockers long enough in advance to assess safety and
tolerability, preferably more than 1 day before surgery.110,121-123
(Level of Evidence: B) □

Class III: Harm □

-Blocker therapy should not be started on the day of surβ gery.110
(Level of Evidence: B)

RCRI, Revised cardiac risk index. From Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE,
Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64(22):e77--e137.

withdrawal greater than 4 days was associated with a 2.9 odds ratio of
increased risk of cardiac morbidity in vascular surgery.169d The
guidelines advocate continuing statin therapy in patients currently
taking statins as a Class I indication. A multimodal approach to medical
management should be taken in high-risk patients. There continues to be
controversy regarding the optimal management of ACE inhibitors and ARBs.
In the Veterans Administration, withholding ARB postoperatively is
strongly associated with increased 30-day mortality, especially in
younger patients, although residual confounding may be present.169e In
the VISION trial, compared to patients who continued their ACE
inhibitors/ angiotensin II receptor blockers, the ACE/ARB users who
withheld their agents in the 24 hours before surgery were less likely to
suffer the primary composite outcome of all-cause death, stroke, or
myocardial injury (adjusted relative risk, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.70 to 0.96; P
= .01); and intraoperative hypotension (adjusted relative risk, 0.80;
95% CI, 0.72-0.93; P \< .001).169f The current AHA/ACC Guidelines
suggest that continuation of ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor ARBs
periopera-

VALVULAR HEART DISEASE Major alterations in the preoperative management
of patients with valvular heart disease have been made regarding the use
of anticoagulant therapy and are now based on the causes of the disease.
Preoperative and intraoperative management of patients with valvular
heart disease is discussed in Chapters 31 and 54. The prognosis and the
perioperative risk for patients with valvular heart disease depend on
the stage of the disease. Although stenotic lesions typically progress
faster than regurgitant lesions, regurgitant lesions from infective
endocarditis, rupture of the chordae tendineae, or ischemic heart
disease can be rapidly fatal. Left ventricular dysfunction is common in
the late stage of valvular heart disease, both stenotic and regurgitant.
Preoperative maintenance of drug therapy can be crucial; for example, a
patient with severe aortic stenosis can deteriorate rapidly with the
onset of atrial fibrillation or flutter because the atrial contribution
to left ventricular filling can be critical in maintaining cardiac
output. One of the most serious complications of valvular heart surgery
and of preoperative valvular heart disease is cardiac arrhythmia.
Conduction disorders and long-term therapy with antiarrhythmic and
inotropic drugs are discussed elsewhere in this chapter. The reader is
referred to Chapter 78 and to other sources for discussion of the
management of a child with congenital heart disease who is undergoing
noncardiac surgery.171