CHAPTER

18

Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation
KEY CONCEPTS The cornerstones of an effective preoperative or
preprocedure evaluation are the history and physical examination, which
should include a complete and up-to-date listing of all medications
taken by the patient in the recent past, all pertinent allergies, and
responses and reactions to previous anesthetics. The anesthesiologist
should not be expected to provide the riskversus-benefit discussion for
the proposed surgery or procedure; this is the responsibility and
purview of the responsible surgeon or "proceduralist." By convention,
physicians in many countries use the American Society of
Anesthesiologists' classification to identify relative risk prior to
conscious sedation and surgical anesthesia. In general, the indications
for cardiovascular investigations are the same in elective surgical
patients as in any other patient with a similar medical condition.
Adequacy of long-term blood glucose control can be easily and rapidly
assessed by measurement of hemoglobin A1c.

In patients deemed at high risk for thrombosis (eg, those with certain
mechanical heart valve implants or with atrial fibrillation and a prior
thromboembolic stroke), chronic anticoagulants should be replaced by
intramuscular low-molecular-weight heparins or by intravenous
unfractionated heparin. Current guidelines recommend postponing all but
mandatory emergency surgery until at least 1 month after any coronary
intervention and suggest that treatment options other than a drugeluting
stent (which will require prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy) be used
in patients expected to undergo a surgical procedure within 12 months
after the intervention. There are no good data to support restricting
fluid intake (of any kind or any amount) more than 2 h before induction
of general anesthesia in healthy patients undergoing elective
procedures; moreover, there is strong evidence that nondiabetic patients
who drink fluids containing carbohydrates and protein up to 2 h before
induction of anesthesia experience less perioperative nausea and
dehydration than those who are fasted longer. To be valuable,
preoperative testing must discriminate: There must be an avoidable
increased perioperative risk when the results are abnormal (and the risk
will remain unknown if the test is not performed), and when testing
fails to detect the abnormality (or it has been corrected), there must
be reduced risk. The utility of a test depends on its sensitivity and
specificity. Sensitive tests have a low rate of false-negative results
and rarely fail to identify an abnormality when one is present, whereas
specific tests have a low rate of false-positive results and rarely
identify an abnormality when one is not present. Premedication should be
given purposefully, not as a mindless routine. Incomplete, inaccurate,
or illegible records unnecessarily complicate defending a physician
against otherwise unjustified allegations of malpractice.

PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION The cornerstones of an effective preoperative or
preprocedure evaluation are the medical history and physical
examination, which should include a complete and up-to-date listing of
all medications taken by the patient in the recent past, all pertinent
allergies, and responses and reactions to previous anesthetics.
Additionally, this evaluation may include diagnostic tests, imaging
procedures, or consultations from other physicians when indicated. A
patient's initial contact with a perioperative surgical home or enhanced
recovery after surgery (ERAS) program ideally will occur at the time of
the preoperative evaluation visit. An enhanced recovery may require
"prehabilitation" with smoking cessation and one or more of the
following: nutritional supplementation, an exercise regimen, and
adjustment of medications. The preoperative evaluation will often guide
the anesthetic plan. Inadequate preoperative planning and incomplete
patient preparation lead to avoidable delays, cancellations,
complications, and costs. The preoperative evaluation serves multiple
purposes. One purpose is to identify those patients whose outcomes
likely will be improved by implementation of a specific medical
treatment (which rarely may require that planned surgery be
rescheduled). For example, a 60-year-old patient scheduled for elective
total hip arthroplasty who also has unstable angina from left main
coronary artery disease would more likely survive if coronary artery
bypass grafting is performed before rather than after the elective
orthopedic procedure. Another purpose of the preoperative evaluation is
to identify patients whose condition is so poor that the proposed
surgery might only hasten death without improving the quality of life.
For example, a patient with severe chronic lung disease, end-stage
kidney disease, liver failure, and chronic heart failure likely would
not survive to derive benefit from an 8-h, complex, multilevel spinal
fusion with instrumentation. A patient's preoperative evaluation can
uncover findings that will change the anesthetic plan (Table 18--1). For
example, the anesthetic plan may need to be adjusted for a patient whose
trachea appears difficult to intubate, one with a family history of
malignant hyperthermia, or one with an infection near where a proposed
regional anesthetic would be administered. TABLE 18--1 The anesthetic
plan.

Will sedative-hypnotic premedication be useful? What type(s) of
anesthesia will be employed? General1 Airway management Induction drugs
Maintenance drugs Regional Technique(s) Agent(s) Sedation and monitored
anesthesia care Supplemental oxygen Specific sedative drugs Are there
special intraoperative management issues? Nonstandard monitors Positions
other than supine Relative or absolute contraindications to specific
anesthetic drugs Fluid management Special techniques Site (anesthetizing
location) concerns How will the patient be managed postoperatively?
Management of acute pain Intensive care Postoperative ventilation
Hemodynamic monitoring 1Including need for (or need for avoidance of)
muscle relaxation.

Another purpose of the preoperative evaluation is to provide the patient
with an estimate of anesthetic risk. However, the anesthesiologist
should not be expected to provide the risk-versus-benefit discussion for
the proposed surgery or procedure; this is the responsibility and
purview of the responsible surgeon or "proceduralist." For example, a
discussion of the

risks and benefits of robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy versus
"open" prostatectomy, radiation therapy, or "watchful waiting" requires
detailed knowledge of the current medical literature and the
capabilities of an individual urologist. Finally, the preoperative
evaluation presents an opportunity for the anesthesiologist to describe
the proposed anesthetic plan in the context of the overall surgical and
postoperative plan, provide the patient with psychological support, and
obtain informed consent from the patient. By convention, physicians in
many countries use the American Society of Anesthesiologists' (ASA)
physical status classification to define relative risk prior to
conscious sedation or surgical anesthesia (Table 18--2). The ASA
physical status classification has many advantages: it is time tested,
simple, and reproducible, and, most importantly, it has been shown to be
strongly associated with perioperative risk. However, many other risk
assessment tools are available, particularly in the area of
cardiovascular risk assessment (see Chapter 21). TABLE 18--2 American
Society of Anesthesiologists' physical status classification of
patients. Class

Definition

1

Normal healthy patient

2

Patient with mild systemic disease (no functional limitations)

3

Patient with severe systemic disease (some functional limitations)

4

Patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life
(functionality incapacitated)

5

Moribund patient who is not expected to survive without the operation

6

Brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for donor purposes

Class

Definition

E

If the procedure is an emergency, the physical status is followed by "E"
(eg, "2E")

Data from Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters, Apfelbaum JL,
Connis RT, et al.Â Practice advisory for preanesthesia evaluation: An
updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force
on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Anesthesiology. 2012 Mar;116(3):522--538.

Elements of the Preoperative History Patients presenting for elective
surgery and anesthesia typically require the recording of a focused
medical history that emphasizes abnormalities of exercise tolerance;
nutritional and functional status; cardiac, pulmonary, endocrine,
kidney, or liver function; electrolytes or metabolism; and anatomic
issues relevant to airway management or regional anesthesia. How the
patient responded to and recovered from previous anesthetics can be
helpful. The ASA and other societies publish and periodically update
general guidelines for preoperative assessment (see Guidelines at end of
chapter). A. Cardiovascular Issues Guidelines for preoperative cardiac
assessment are regularly updated and available from the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association and from the European Society
of Cardiology (see Guidelines). A more complete discussion of
cardiovascular assessment is provided in Chapter 21. The focus of
preoperative cardiac assessment should be on determining whether the
patient would benefit from further cardiac evaluation or interventions
prior to the scheduled surgery. However, the same approach is not
appropriate for all patients. The prudent approach to a patient
undergoing elective knee arthroplasty will differ from that for a
patient needing resection of pancreatic cancer, given the benign results
of a delay in the former procedure and the possible deadly effects of a
delay in the latter procedure. In general, the indications for
cardiovascular investigations are the same in elective surgical patients
as in any other patient with a similar medical condition. Put another
way, the fact that a

patient is scheduled to undergo elective surgery does not change the
indications for testing to diagnose coronary artery disease. B.
Pulmonary Issues Perioperative pulmonary complications, most notably
postoperative respiratory depression and respiratory failure, are vexing
problems associated with obesity and obstructive sleep apnea. A
guideline developed by the American College of Physicians identifies
patients 60 years of age or older and those with chronic obstructive
lung disease, with markedly reduced exercise tolerance, with functional
dependence, or with heart failure as potentially requiring preoperative
and postoperative interventions to avoid respiratory complications.
Additionally, the risk of postoperative respiratory complications is
also associated with the following: ASA physical status 3 and 4,
cigarette smoking, surgeries lasting longer than 4 h, certain types of
surgery (abdominal, thoracic, aortic aneurysm, head and neck, emergency
surgery), and general anesthesia (compared with cases in which general
anesthesia was not used). Efforts at prevention of respiratory
complications in patients at risk should include cessation of cigarette
smoking several weeks before surgery and lung expansion techniques (eg,
incentive spirometry) after surgery. Patients with asthma, particularly
those receiving suboptimal medical management, have an increased risk
for bronchospasm during airway manipulation. Appropriate use of
analgesia and monitoring are key strategies for avoiding postoperative
respiratory depression in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Further
discussion of this topic appears in Chapter 44. C. Endocrine and
Metabolic Issues The appropriate target blood glucose concentration has
been the subject of several celebrated clinical trials. "Tight" control
of blood glucose, with a target concentration in the "normal" range, was
shown to improve outcomes in ambulatory patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Other more recent trials conducted in subjects with critical
illness have shown that blood glucose should not be so tightly
controlled. The usual practice is to obtain a blood glucose measurement
in patients with diabetes on the morning of elective surgery.
Unfortunately, many

patients with diabetes who present for elective surgery do not maintain
blood glucose within the desired range. Other patients, who may be
unaware that they have type 2 diabetes, present with blood glucose
measurements above the normal range. The adequacy of long-term blood
glucose control can be easily and rapidly assessed by measurement of
hemoglobin A1c. In patients with abnormally elevated hemoglobin A1c,
referral to a diabetology service for education about the disease and
adjustment of diet and medications to improve metabolic control may be
beneficial. Elective surgery should be delayed in patients presenting
with marked hyperglycemia; in an otherwise well-managed patient with
type 1 diabetes, this delay might consist only of rearranging the order
of scheduled cases to allow insulin infusion to bring the blood glucose
concentration closer to the normal range before surgery. A more complete
discussion of diabetes mellitus and other perioperative endocrine
concerns is provided in Chapter 35. D. Coagulation Issues Three
important coagulation issues that must be addressed during the
preoperative evaluation are (1) how to manage patients who are taking
warfarin or new oral anticoagulants (eg, rivaroxaban, apixaban,
dabigatran); (2) how to manage patients with coronary artery disease who
are taking clopidogrel or related agents; and (3) whether one can safely
provide neuraxial anesthesia to patients who either are currently
receiving anticoagulants or who will receive anticoagulation
perioperatively. In the first circumstance, most patients undergoing
anything more involved than minor surgery will require discontinuation
of anticoagulation in advance of surgery to avoid excessive blood loss.
The key issues to be addressed are how far in advance the drug should be
discontinued and whether the patient will require "bridging" therapy
with another, shorter-acting, agent. In patients deemed at high risk for
thrombosis (eg, those with certain mechanical heart valve implants or
with atrial fibrillation and a prior thromboembolic stroke), chronic
anticoagulants should be bridged with intramuscular low molecular weight
heparins (eg, enoxaparin) or by intravenous unfractionated heparin. The
prescribing physician and surgeon may need to be consulted regarding
discontinuation of these agents and whether bridging will be required.
In patients with a high risk of thrombosis who receive bridging therapy,
the risk of death from excessive bleeding is an order of magnitude lower
than the risk

of death or disability from stroke if the bridging therapy is omitted.
Patients at lower risk for thrombosis may have their anticoagulant drug
discontinued preoperatively and then reinitiated after successful
surgery. In general, the indications for bridging are becoming more
restricted. Clopidogrel and similar agents are often administered with
aspirin (so-called dual antiplatelet therapy) to patients with coronary
artery disease who have received intracoronary stenting. Immediately
after stenting, such patients are at increased risk of acute myocardial
infarction if these agents are abruptly discontinued. Therefore, current
guidelines recommend postponing all but mandatory surgery until at least
1 month after any coronary intervention and suggest that treatment
options other than a drug-eluting stent (which will require prolonged
dual antiplatelet therapy) be used in patients expected to undergo a
surgical procedure within 12 months after the intervention (eg, a
patient with coronary disease who also has resectable colon cancer). As
the drugs, treatment options, and consensus guidelines are updated
frequently, when we are in doubt we consult with a cardiologist when
patients receiving these agents require a surgical procedure. The third
issue---when it may be safe to perform regional (particularly neuraxial)
anesthesia in patients who are or will be receiving anticoagulation
therapy---has also been the subject of debate. The American Society of
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine publishes a regularly updated
consensus guideline on this topic, and other prominent societies (eg,
the European Society of Anaesthesiologists) also provide guidance on
this topic (see Chapter 45). E. Gastrointestinal Issues Since
Mendelson's 1946 report, aspiration of gastric contents has been
recognized as a potentially disastrous pulmonary complication of
surgical anesthesia. It has also been long recognized that the risk of
aspiration is increased in certain groups of patients: pregnant women in
the second and third trimesters, those whose stomachs have not emptied
after a recent meal, and those with serious gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD). Although there is consensus that pregnant women and
those who have recently (within 6 h) consumed a full meal should be
treated as if they have "full" stomachs, there is less consensus as to
the necessary period of

time in which patients must fast before elective surgery. Proof of the
lack of consensus is the fact that the ASA's guideline on this topic was
voted down by the ASA House of Delegates several years in a row before
it was presented in a form that received majority approval. The
guideline as approved is more permissive of fluid intake than many
anesthesiologists would prefer, and many medical centers have policies
that are more restrictive than the ASA guideline on this topic. The
truth is that there are no good data to support restricting fluid intake
(of any kind or any amount) more than 2 h before induction of general
anesthesia in healthy patients undergoing elective (other than gastric)
procedures; moreover, there is strong evidence that nondiabetic patients
who drink fluids containing carbohydrates and protein up to 2 h before
induction of anesthesia experience less perioperative nausea and
dehydration than those who are fasted longer. Patients claiming a
history of GERD present vexing problems. Some of these patients will be
at increased risk for aspiration; others may carry this "self-diagnosis"
based on advertisements or internet searches, or may have been given
this diagnosis by a physician who did not follow the standard diagnostic
criteria. Our approach is to treat patients who have only occasional
symptoms like any other patient without GERD and to treat patients with
consistent symptoms (multiple times per week) with medications (eg,
nonparticulate antacids such as sodium citrate) and techniques (eg,
tracheal intubation rather than laryngeal mask airway) as if they were
at increased risk for aspiration.

Elements of the Preoperative Physical Examination The preoperative
history and physical examination complement one another: The physical
examination may detect abnormalities not apparent from the history, and
the history helps focus the physical examination. Examination of healthy
asymptomatic patients should include measurement of vital signs (blood
pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and temperature) and examination
of the airway, heart, and lungs using standard techniques of inspection,
palpation, percussion, and auscultation. Before administering regional
anesthetics or inserting invasive monitors, one should examine the
relevant anatomy; infection or anatomic abnormalities near the site may
contraindicate the planned procedure (see Chapters 5, 45, and 46). An

abbreviated, focused neurological examination serves to document whether
any neurological deficits may be present before a regional anesthesia
procedure is performed. The anesthesiologist must examine the patient's
airway before every anesthetic is administered. Any loose or chipped
teeth, caps, bridges, or dentures should be noted. Poor fit of the
anesthesia mask should be expected in edentulous patients and those with
significant facial abnormalities. Micrognathia (a short distance between
the chin and the hyoid bone), prominent upper incisors, a large tongue,
limited range of motion of the temporomandibular joint or cervical
spine, or a short or thick neck suggest that difficulty may be
encountered in direct laryngoscopy for tracheal intubation (see Chapter
19). The Mallampati score is often recorded.

Preoperative Laboratory Testing Routine laboratory testing is not
recommended for fit and asymptomatic patients. "Routine" testing rarely
alters perioperative management; moreover, inconsequential abnormal
values may trigger further unnecessary testing, delays, and costs.
Nonetheless, despite no evidence of benefit, some physicians request
blood tests, an electrocardiogram, and a chest radiograph for all
patients, perhaps in the misplaced hope of reducing their exposure to
litigation. Ideally, testing should be guided by the history and
physical examination. To be valuable, preoperative testing must
discriminate: There must be an avoidable increased perioperative risk
when the results are abnormal (and the risk will remain unknown if the
test is not performed), and when testing fails to detect the abnormality
(or it has been corrected), there must be reduced risk. Useful tests
have a low rate of false-positive and falsenegative results (Table
18--3). The utility of a test depends on its sensitivity and
specificity. Sensitive tests have a low rate of falsenegative results
and rarely fail to identify an abnormality when one is present, whereas
specific tests have a low rate of false-positive results and rarely
identify an abnormality when one is not present. TABLE 18--3 Calculation
of sensitivity and specificity based on presence or absence of disease
in the population being tested.

True positives (TP) have both a positive test and the disease for which
they are being tested False positives (FP) have a positive test but do
not have the disease True negatives (TN) have a negative test and do not
have the disease for which they are being tested False negatives (FN)
have a negative test but do have the disease Sensitivity = TP/(TP + FN)
Specificity = TN/(TN + FP) The predictive value of a positive test (PV+)
indicates the likelihood that the patient has the disease if they test
positive. (PV+) = TP/(TP + FP) The predictive value of a negative test
(PV--) indicates the likelihood that the patient is free of the disease
if they test negative (PV--) = TN/(TN + FN) The prevalence of a disease
or of an abnormal test result varies with the population tested. Testing
is therefore most effective when sensitive and specific tests are used
in patients in whom the abnormality will be detected frequently enough
to justify the expense and inconvenience of the test procedure.
Accordingly, laboratory testing should be based on the history and
physical examination and the nature of the proposed surgery or
procedure. Thus, a baseline hemoglobin or hematocrit measurement is
desirable in any patient about to undergo a procedure in which extensive
blood loss and transfusion are likely, particularly when there is
sufficient time to correct anemia preoperatively (eg, with iron
supplements). Testing fertile women for pregnancy is controversial (but
done routinely in many centers) and should not be done without the
permission of the patient; pregnancy testing involves detection of
chorionic gonadotropin in urine or serum. Routine testing for HIV and
routine coagulation studies are not indicated. Urinalysis is not
cost-effective in asymptomatic healthy patients; nevertheless, a
preoperative urinalysis is required by state law in at least one U.S.
jurisdiction.

PREMEDICATION

A classic study showed that a preoperative visit from an
anesthesiologist resulted in greater reduction in patient anxiety than
preoperative sedative drugs. Yet, there was a time when virtually every
patient received premedication before arriving in the preoperative area
in anticipation of surgery. The belief was that all patients benefitted
from preoperative sedation and anticholinergics, often combined with an
opioid. With the transition to outpatient surgery and "same-day"
hospital admission, preoperative sedative-hypnotics or opioids are now
almost never administered before patients arrive in the preoperative
holding area for elective surgery. Children, especially those aged 2 to
10 years who (along with their parents) likely will experience
separation anxiety may benefit from premedication administered in the
preoperative holding area. This topic is discussed in Chapter 42. Oral
or intravenous midazolam or nasal dexmedetomidine are common methods.
Adults often receive intravenous midazolam (1--5 mg) once an intravenous
line has been established. If a painful procedure (eg, regional block or
a central venous line) will be performed while the patient remains
awake, small doses of opioid (typically fentanyl) will often be given.
Patients who will undergo airway surgery or extensive airway
manipulations benefit from preoperative administration of an
anticholinergic agent (glycopyrrolate or atropine) to reduce airway
secretions before and during surgery. Patients who are expected to have
significant amounts of postoperative pain will often be given
"multimodal" analgesia, including various combinations of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, acetaminophen, gabapentinoids, and anti-nausea
drugs in the preoperative holding area. The fundamental message here is
that premedication should be given purposefully, not as a mindless
routine.

DOCUMENTATION Physicians should provide high-quality, safe, and
cost-efficient medical care and document what they have done. Adequate
documentation provides guidance to those who will encounter the patient
in the future. It permits others to assess the quality of the care that
was given. Without proper documentation, a physician will not be paid
for his or her services; incomplete documentation may not justify the
otherwise appropriate "full" payment. Incomplete documentation may
render it difficult for a hospital

system to recover its costs and may incorrectly lead to the conclusion
that a patient's hospitalization was unnecessary or inappropriately
prolonged. Finally, inadequate and disorganized documentation provide
limited support for a potential defense case should a claim for medical
malpractice be filed.

Preoperative Assessment Note The preoperative assessment note should
appear in the patient's permanent medical record and should describe
pertinent findings, including the medical and surgical history,
anesthetic history, current medications and allergies (and whether
medications were taken on the day of surgery), physical examination, ASA
physical status, pertinent laboratory and imaging results,
electrocardiograms, and recommendations of any consultants. A comment is
particularly important when a consultant's recommendation will not be
followed. The preoperative note should identify the anesthetic plan,
indicating whether regional or general anesthesia (or sedation) will be
used, and whether invasive monitoring or other advanced techniques will
be employed. It should include a statement regarding the informed
consent discussion with the patient (or guardian). Documentation of the
informed consent discussion may take the form of a narrative indicating
that the plan, alternative plans, and their advantages and disadvantages
(including their relative risks) were presented, understood, and
accepted by the patient. Some centers include consent for anesthesia
within the consent for surgery (or the procedure). Alternatively, the
patient may be asked to read and sign a separate anesthesia consent form
that contains the same information. In the United States, the Joint
Commission (TJC) requires an immediate preanesthetic "reevaluation" to
determine whether the patient's status has changed in the time since the
preoperative evaluation was performed. This reevaluation might include a
review of the medical record to search for any new laboratory results or
consultation reports if the patient was last seen on another date.
However, even when the elapsed time is less than a minute, the
bureaucracy will not be denied: the "box" must be checked to document
that there has been no interval change.

Intraoperative Anesthesia Record

The intraoperative anesthesia record serves many purposes. It functions
as documentation of intraoperative monitoring, a reference for future
anesthetics for that patient, and a source of data for quality assurance
and billing. This record should be terse, pertinent, and accurate.
Increasingly, parts of the anesthesia record are generated automatically
and recorded electronically. Such anesthesia information management
systems (commonly abbreviated AIMS) have many theoretical and practical
advantages over the traditional paper record but also introduce all the
common pitfalls of computerization, including the potential for
unrecognized recording of artefactual data, the possibility that
practitioners will find attending to the computer more interesting than
attending to the patient, the inevitable occurrence of device and
software shutdowns, and increased cost. Regardless of whether the record
is on paper or electronic, it should document the anesthetic care in the
operating room by including the following elements: â¢ That there has
been a preoperative check of the anesthesia machine and other relevant
equipment â¢ That there has been a reevaluation of the patient
immediately prior to induction of anesthesia (a TJC requirement) â¢ Time
of administration, dosage, and route of drugs given intraoperatively â¢
Intraoperative estimates of blood loss and urinary output â¢ Results of
laboratory tests obtained during the operation (when there is an AIMS
linked to an electronic medical record, such testing may be recorded
elsewhere) â¢ Intravenous fluids and any blood products administered â¢
Pertinent procedure notes (eg, for tracheal intubation or insertion of
invasive monitors) â¢ Any specialized intraoperative techniques such as
hypotensive anesthesia, one-lung ventilation, high-frequency jet
ventilation, or cardiopulmonary bypass â¢ Timing and conduct of
intraoperative events such as induction, positioning, surgical incision,
and extubation â¢ Unusual events or complications (eg, arrhythmias,
cardiac arrest)

â¢ Condition of the patient at the time of "handoff" to the
postanesthesia or intensive care unit nurse By tradition and convention
(and, in the United States, according to practice guidelines) arterial
blood pressure and heart rate are recorded graphically at no less than 5
min intervals. Data from other monitors are also usually entered
graphically, whereas descriptions of techniques or complications are
described in text. Unfortunately, the conventional, handwritten
anesthetic record is ill suited for documenting critical incidents, such
as a cardiac arrest. In such cases, a separate text note inserted in the
patient's medical record may be necessary. Careful recording of the
timing of events is needed to avoid discrepancies between multiple
simultaneous records (anesthesia record, nurses' notes, cardiopulmonary
resuscitation record, and other physicians' entries in the medical
record). Such discrepancies are frequently targeted by malpractice
attorneys as evidence of incompetence, inaccuracy, or deceit.
Incomplete, inaccurate, or illegible records unnecessarily complicate
defending a physician against otherwise unjustified allegations of
malpractice.

Postoperative Notes After accompanying the patient to the postanesthesia
care unit (PACU), the anesthesia provider should remain with the patient
until normal vital signs have been measured and the patient's condition
is deemed stable. An unstable patient may require being "handed off" to
another physician. Before discharge from the PACU, a note should be
written by an anesthesiologist to document the patient's recovery from
anesthesia, any apparent anesthesiarelated complications, the immediate
postoperative condition of the patient, and the patient's disposition
(discharge to an outpatient area, an inpatient ward, an intensive care
unit, or home). In the United States, as of 2009, the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services require that certain elements be included
in all postoperative notes (Table 18--4). Recovery from anesthesia
should be assessed at least once within 48 h after discharge from the
PACU in all inpatients. Postoperative notes should document the general
condition of the patient, the presence or absence of any
anesthesia-related

complications, and any measures undertaken to treat such complications.
The anesthesiologist's involvement with the patient may continue through
the early stages of postoperative recovery when the anesthesiologist is
involved in a functioning perioperative surgical home or is providing
treatment of postoperative pain (see Chapters 48, 59). TABLE 18--4
Elements required by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services in
all postoperative notes. Respiratory function, including respiratory
rate, airway patency, and oxygen saturation Cardiovascular function,
including pulse rate and blood pressure Mental status Temperature Pain
Nausea and vomiting Postoperative hydration Data from the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Revised Anesthesia Services
Interpretive Guidelines. issued December 30, 2009.

CASE DISCUSSION Medical Malpractice (also see Chapter 54) A healthy
45-year-old man has a cardiac arrest during an elective laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. Although cardiopulmonary resuscitation is successful,
the patient is left with permanent neuropsychological deficits that
preclude his return to work. One year later, the patient files a
complaint against the anesthesiologist, surgeon, and hospital. What four
elements must be proved by the plaintiff (patient) to establish
negligence on the part of the defendant (physician or hospital)? 1.
Duty: Once a physician establishes a professional relationship with a
patient, the physician owes that patient certain obligations, such as

adhering to the "standard of care." 2. Breach of Duty: If these
obligations are not fulfilled, the physician has breached his or her
duty to the patient. 3. Injury: An injury must result. The injury may
result in general damages (eg, pain and suffering) or special damages
(eg, loss of income). 4. Causation: The plaintiff must demonstrate that
the breach of duty was the proximate cause of the injury. Had it not
been for the breach of duty, the injury would not have occurred. How is
the standard of care defined and established? Individual physicians are
expected to perform as any prudent and reasonable physician would in
similar circumstances. This does not mandate "best" care or optimal
care, only care that would meet the minimum standard of a prudent and
reasonable physician. As a specialist, the anesthesiologist is held to a
higher standard of knowledge and skill with respect to the subject
matter of anesthesia than would a general practitioner or a physician in
another specialty. Expert witnesses usually provide testimony to define
the standard of care in legal proceedings. Medical malpractice cases are
governed by the laws of the state or jurisdiction in which the event
took place, and these may differ from state to state. For example, some
states require that an expert witness have practiced medicine recently
in the state or an immediately adjacent state; others have no
"residence" requirement for expert witnesses. The specific circumstances
pertaining to each individual case are taken into account. The law
recognizes that there are differences of opinion and varying schools of
thought within the medical profession. How is causation determined? It
is usually the plaintiff who bears the burden of proving that the injury
would not have occurred "but for" the negligence of the physician, or
that the physician's action was a "substantial factor" in causing the
injury. An exception is the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur ("the thing
speaks for itself"), which permits a finding of negligence based solely
on the evidence. For example, if a set of keys were visualized inside a
patient on a chest radiograph after a thoracotomy, the doctrine of res
ipsa loquitur would apply. Res ipsa loquitur could not be used in the
case under

discussion because the plaintiff would have to establish that cardiac
arrest could not occur in the absence of negligence and that cardiac
arrest could not have been due to something outside the control of the
anesthesiologist. An important concept is that causation in civil cases
in the United States need only be established by a preponderance of the
evidence ("more likely than not")---as opposed to criminal cases, in
which all elements of a charged offense must be proved "beyond a
reasonable doubt." What factors influence the likelihood of a
malpractice suit? 1. The Physician--Patient Relationship: This is
particularly important for the anesthesiologist, who usually does not
meet the patient until immediately before the anesthetic is
administered. Another problem is that the patient is unconscious while
under the anesthesiologist's care. Thus, the preoperative and
postoperative visits with the patient are often the only opportunities
to establish a good relationship with the patient. Family members should
also be included during these meetings with patients (provided the
patient does not object), particularly during the postoperative visit if
there has been an intraoperative complication. 2. Adequacy of Informed
Consent: Rendering care to a competent patient who does not consent
constitutes assault and battery. Consent is not enough, however. The
patient should be informed of the contemplated procedure, including its
reasonably anticipated risks, its possible benefits, and the therapeutic
alternatives. The physician may be liable for a complication---even if
it is not due to the negligent performance of a procedure---if a jury is
convinced that a reasonable person would have refused treatment if
properly informed of the possibility of the complication. This does not
mean, of course, that a documented consent relieves from liability
physicians who violate the standard of care. 3. Quality of
Documentation: Careful documentation of the perioperative visits,
informed consent, consultations with other specialists, intraoperative
events, and postoperative care is essential. The viewpoint of many
courts and juries, reinforced by plaintiff's attorneys, is that "if it
isn't written down, it wasn't done." It goes without saying that medical
records should never be intentionally destroyed or altered.

GUIDELINES http://www.asahq.org/ https://www.asra.com/ Fleisher LA,
Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al.Â American College of Cardiology;
American Heart Association. ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:e77. Guarracino F, Baldassarri R, Priebe HJ.
Revised ESC/ESA Guidelines on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular
assessment and management. Implications for preoperative clinical
evaluation. Minerva Anestesiol. 2015;81:226. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen
E, Kopp SL, Gogarten W, Leffert LR, Benzon HT. Regional anesthesia in
the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: American
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Evidence-Based
Guidelines (Fourth Edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43:263. Lambert
E, Carey S. Practice guideline recommendations on perioperative fasting:
a systematic review. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr.
2015;pii:0148607114567713. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting
and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary
aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective
procedures: an updated report by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists task force on preoperative fasting and the use of
pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration.
Anesthesiology. 2017;126:376.

SUGGESTED READINGS Ayoub K, Nairooz R, Almomani A, et al.Â Perioperative
heparin bridging in atrial fibrillation patients requiring temporary
interruption of

anticoagulation: evidence from meta-analysis. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis.
2016;pii:S1052. Bierle DM, Raslau D, Regan DW, Sundsted KK, Mauck KF.
Preoperative evaluation before noncardiac surgery. Mayo Clin Proc.
2020;95:807. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). CMS Manual
System. Pub 100-07 State Operations Provider Certification. DHHS.
Available at: http://www.kdheks.gov/bhfr/download/Appendix_L.pdf
(accessed December 16, 2017). Doherty JU, Gluckman TJ, Hucker WJ, et
al.Â 2017 ACC Expert consensus decision pathway for periprocedural
management of anticoagulation in patients with nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology Clinical
Expert Consensus Document Task Force. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:871.
Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, et al; BRIDGE Investigators.
Perioperative bridging anticoagulation in patients with atrial
fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:823. Egbert LD, Battit G, Turndorf
H, Beecher HK. The value of the preoperative visit by an anesthetist. A
study of doctor-patient rapport. JAMA. 1963;185:553. Friedrich S,
Meybohm P, Kranke P. Nulla Per Os (NPO) guidelines: time to revisit?
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2020;33:740. Jeong BH, Shin B, Eom JS, et
al.Â Development of a prediction rule for estimating postoperative
pulmonary complications. PLoS One. 2014;9:e113656. Mendelson CL. The
aspiration of stomach contents into the lungs during obstetric
anesthesia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1946;52:191. Williams DGA, Molinger J,
Wischmeyer PE. The malnourished surgery patient: a silent epidemic in
perioperative outcomes? Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2019;32:405.


